originated through what I consider as ‘systematic deduction’.  To make such systematic
‘Systematic deduction’ is one of the most popular methods market participants adapt to
trade the market. However, not all systematic deductions are right, you could, of course,
succumb to biases and make systematic errors while making these deductions.
Nevertheless, systematic deduction is one of the other popular techniques to trade. Other
None of the above mentioned ‘approach’ to trade the market, including the ‘systematic
4. Momentum strategy (Portfolio approach)
In the arbitrage world – this translates to buying the cheaper stock i.e. HDFC and selling
As you may have guessed, pair trading requires you to buy and sell two
By simultaneously buying and selling the two assets, we are trying to profit from the
If you think about this, in its pure sense, this is an arbitrage opportunity – we buy the
undervalued security and sell the overvalued security. For this reason, some even call this
5. In pair trading, you buy the undervalued security and sell the overvalued one
called the ‘Correlation’. I guess, we have discussed correlation multiple times on varsity.
basic stats for this version of pair trading. Given this, we will now define 3 most commonly
The mean and median when viewed together gives a sense of the trend. More on this later.
If you have been a regular reader on Varsity, then chances are you’d have come across the
standard deviation. Again, standard deviation as a concept has been explained in Varsity
variation or dispersion of a set of data values”.
With this information, we can choose to either buy the pair or short the pair. Of course, we
discuss a slightly more complicated version of Pair Trading
to buy or sell a pair, we will do that later in this chapter. For now, assume that you can buy
or sell a pair just like the way you can buy or sell a single stock.
As you may have guessed, the decision to buy or sell a pair is dependent on the variable
In fact, this phenomenon is referred to as ‘Mean reversion’ or reversion to mean.
words, you can short the ratio at the high point and buy it back around the mean.
Likewise, the second circle points to an opportunity where one can buy the ratio, with an
and initiate a trade only when the chance of mean reversion is very high. Or in other
1. A long trade requires you to buy Stock A and Sell Stock B
2. A short trade requires you to sell Stock A and Buy Stock B
We Sell Axis Bank @ 523 and buy back ICIC at 300.1. The P&L and other details are as
25th Oct Axis Bank Buy @ 473 1200 31st Oct Sell @ 523 50*1200 = 60K
initiate a short pair trade. Remember in a short trade, we sell Axis and buy ICICI.
If you find it confusing to remember which one to buy and sell, think of it this way – the
numerator is the dominating stock, so if the pair trade demands you to go long, then buy
Hence we sell Axis Bank (numerator) and sell ICICI Bank (denominator).
1200 8th Sept Buy @ 571 3.1*1200 = 3.72K
3. We have not adhered to strict trade definitions – stop loss, targets etc. If you
5. We are yet to discuss the risk associated with Pair trading
4. Long pair trade requires you to buy the numerator and sell the denominator
5. Short pair trade requires you to sell the numerator and buy the denominator
construct a trade. This trade obviously involves buying and selling the two stocks
1. Starting from Chapter 1 to 7, we discussed a very basic version of a pair trade. We
amount of directional risk. Don’t forget the basic premise here, we are considering these
away the directional risk associated with this pair.
Mathematically, this also implies that we are looking at pairs which have a low intercept.
1. Long on the pair (buy y, sell x) when the residuals hit -2 standard deviation (-2SD)
2. Short on the pair (sell y, buy x) when the residuals hit +2 standard deviations
thereabouts. Once the trade is initiated, the stop loss is -3 SD for long trades and +3SD for
position is hit if this number is -2.5 or higher with -3.0 as stop loss. A short position is
initiated if this number reads +2.5 or higher with a stop loss at +3.0. In case of long, target
this is a long trade, one is required to buy the dependent stock (Tata Motors) and short the
look at what price the stocks, I didn’t look at support, resistance, RSI etc. Is it not
long side since I’m buying additional 115.
the position open and wait for the target (-1 on residual) or stop loss (-3 on residual) was
The P&L was roughly Rs.14,000/-, not bad I’d say for a relatively low-risk trade.
speculative trading. Although less risky, pair trade has its own share of risk and you need
to be aware of the risk. One of the common ways to lose money is when the pair can
Union Bank (X). The Lot size of Allahabad Bank is 10,000, this implies I need to buy 4378
shares of Union Bank. However, the lot size of Union Bank is 4000, hence I had to buy 370
someone like me, I’d look at risk first and then the reward
Based on the mispricing, you either buy the current month contract and sell the mid-
month contract or sell the current month contract and buy the mid-month contract. Here
1. Buy TCS Futures expiring 28th June 2018 @ 1846
2. Sell TCS Futures expiring 28th July 2018 @ 1851
Here you buy and sell the futures of the same stock, but of contracts belonging to different
is expected to made here. The risk is extremely low in calendar spreads so therefore the
to risk, then this is something you may like.
whole approach. Calendar spreads are a low-risk strategy so therefore do not expect big
bucks from this strategy. However, since you simultaneously buy-sell the same asset, you
take out the directional risk involved in the trade, hence it does make sense to top up the
The rule of thumb in any arbitrage is to always buy the asset in the cheaper market and
sell the same asset in the expensive market, hence the trade here would be to buy the
current month contract and sell the near month contract.
trade here is to sell the current month and buy the near month contract.
1. Sell the spread when the spread increases beyond 1.7205. Sell spread means, sell
the near month contract and buy the current month contract
2. Buy the spread when the spread shrinks below 0.7335. Buy spread means, buy the
near month contract and sell the current month contract.
If you find it hard to figure out which contract to buy and which one to sell when a signal
originates, then simply think in terms of the near month contract. Sell spread means sell
the near month (therefore buy current month) and buy spread means buy the near-month
(therefore sell the current month contract).
In the excel sheet, I now look for the historical opportunities. I will identify the sell spread
deviation levels. On all these occasions, there was a trigger to sell, implying the spread
Let us see how the buy spread trades have performed. I have filtered for all values below
2. Directional risk is eliminated; hence you go can go full throttle on leverage
One such jargon is – momentum. I’m sure we have used momentum is our daily
conversations related to the markets, but what exactly is momentum and how is it
When asked, traders loosely define momentum as the speed at which the markets move.
‘Momentum’ is a physics term, it refers to the quantity of motion that an object has. If you
look at this definition in the context of stocks markets, then everything remains the same,
Simply put, momentum is the rate of change of returns of the stock or the index. If the rate
of change of returns is high, then the momentum is considered high and if the rate of
change of returns is low, the momentum is considered low.
o Which sock has a higher momentum?
higher and therefore we can conclude that Stock B has a higher momentum.
Stock A, has trended up consistently on a day to day basis, while stock B has been quite a
these two stock is considered to have good momentum?
Well, clearly Stock A is consistent in terms of daily returns, exhibits a good uptrend, and
therefore can be considered to have continuity in showcasing momentum.
Now, what if I decide to measure momentum slightly differently? Instead of daily returns,
Stock A and B would qualify as momentum stocks.
The point that I’m trying to make here is that traders generally tend to look at momentum
look at momentum. In fact, the momentum strategy we will discuss later in this chapter
looks at momentum on a larger time frame and not no daily basis. More on this later.
I hope by now, you do have a sense of what exactly momentum means and understood
the fact that momentum can be measured not just in terms of daily returns but also in
terms of larger time frames. In fact, high-frequency traders measure momentum on a
strategies is the momentum strategy. Traders measure momentum in many different
ways to identify opportunity pockets. The core idea across all these strategies remains the
same i.e. to identify momentum and ride the wave.
Momentum strategies can be developed on a single stock basis wherein the idea is to
measure momentum across all the stocks in the tracking universe and trade the ones
which showcase the highest momentum. Do note, momentum can be either way – long or
short, so a trader following single stock momentum strategy will get both long and short
Traders also develop momentum strategies on a sector-specific basis and set up sector-
specific trades. The idea here is to identify sector which exhibits strong momentum, this
can be done by checking momentum in sector-specific indices. Once the sector is
Momentum can also be applied on a portfolio basis. This involves the concept of portfolio
momentum. In my opinion, this is a great strategy as it is not just plain vanilla momentum
strategy but also offers safety in terms of diversification.
portfolio consisting of 10 momentum stocks. Once created, the portfolio is held until the
momentum lasts and then re-balanced.
o The agenda here is to highlight how a momentum portfolio can be set up.
However, this is not the only way to build a momentum portfolio
momentum strategy. If you are not a coder like me, then do find a friend who can
Given the above, here is a systematic guide to building a ‘Momentum Portfolio’.
the spectrum.  The question is, do have to track all these stocks to build a momentum
constitute the momentum portfolio. This means the momentum portfolio will always be a
BSE 500 stocks. Therefore, the momentum portfolio will always be a subset of either the
your tracking universe if you wish to build a momentum portfolio of 12-15 stock.
sense of the momentum in each of the stocks.
tracking universe, we are good to create a momentum portfolio.
Remember, momentum is the rate of change of return and the return itself is measured on
A good momentum portfolio contains about 10-12 stocks. I’m personally comfortable with
assume that we are building a 12 stocks momentum portfolio.
The momentum portfolio is now simply the top 12 stocks in the reordered tracking
universe. In other words, we buy all the stocks starting from rank 1 to rank 12. In the
example we were dealing with, if I were to build a 5 stock momentum portfolio, then it
The rest of the stocks would not constitute the portfolio but will continue to remain in the
last 12 months, then it implies that the stock has good momentum for the defined time
frame. The expectation is that this momentum will continue onto the 13th month as well,
and therefore the stock will continue to generate higher returns.  So if you were to buy
such stocks, then you are to benefit from the expected momentum in the stock.
Back in the days, my trading partner and I were encouraged to build this momentum
Once the momentum portfolio stocks are identified, the idea is to buy all the momentum
stocks, then the idea is to buy Rs. 16,666/- worth of each stock (200,000/12).
By doing so, you create an equally weighted momentum portfolio. Of course, you can
o 50% of capital allocation across the top 5 momentum stocks (rank 1 to 5), and 50%
stocks in terms of the 12-month returns, and created a momentum portfolio by buying the
top 12 stocks. The momentum portfolio was built based on the 12-month performance,
So, we now buy the stocks from rank 1 to 12, just like the way we did in the previous
of stocks would have changed positions. So based on the list, you sell the stocks which no
longer belongs in the portfolio and buy the new stocks which have featured in the latest
momentum portfolio. In essence, you rebalance the portfolio and you do this at the end of
16.4 – Momentum Portfolio variations
o Calculate on a daily basis and even do an intraday momentum portfolio
think about what we have discussed so far, the momentum portfolio is price based.
However, you can build a fundamental based momentum strategy as well. Here are a few
As good as it may seem, the price based momentum strategy works well only when the
market is trending up. When the markets turn choppy, the momentum strategy performs
poorly, and when the markets go down, the momentum portfolio bleeds heavier than the
Having said all of that let me reassure you – a price based momentum strategy, if
o Momentum is the rate of change of return and can be measured across any time
o A price based momentum portfolio consists of stocks which have exhibited highest
momentum over the desired time frame
o The momentum portfolio is simply the top 12 or 15 stocks
o The expectation is that the momentum will continue during the holding period
o Momentum can be measured on fundamental data as well – growth in sales,
o Price based momentum works best in an upward trending market and not really in
a sideways or a down trending market.
So  the  approach  we  take  here  is  that  if  we  can  systematically  analyze  the  numbers
Think  about  Financial  modelling  as  a  systematic  way  to  understand  the  company.  Here
Modelling  =  Indicates  that  we  are  laying  down  a  company’s  financials  systematically,
If  you  are  a  regular  reader  of  Varsity,  we  have  dabbled  with  Financial  Modelling  in  the  module  related  to  Risk  management  and  in  the  Trading  systems  module.  It’s  just  that  we  never  called  it  ‘Financial  Modelling’.
The  data  is  presented  in  a  very  unsystematic  manner.  So  if  you  had  imagined
One  has  to  set  up  the  excel  worksheet  in  a  systematic  way.  The  format  should  be
>>>>  We  can  assume  the  future  trends  based  on  historical  trends.
>>>>  How  will  you  measure  historical  trends?
>>>>>  The  measurement  of  historical  trends  happens  based  on  individual  line  items  in
>>>>  After  measuring  the  historical  trend,  how  will  you  project  the  future  trend?
To  measure  historical  trends,  we  usually  take  the  line  item  as  a  ratio  of  another  line
●  One  can  calculate  the  historical  trends  either  as  a  growth  rate  or  by  taking  a
●  Projections  are  made  by  taking  averages  or  by  making  an  intelligent  guess  ●  It  is  best  when  the  historical  trends  exhibit  a  non-volatile  range  ●  Assumptions  are  an  art  form;  there  is  no  standard  method  to  make  assumptions.
A  gentleman  posted  an  interesting  comment  in  the  previous  chapter.  The  company  he
We  will  make  the  assumptions  for  the  remaining  line  items  on  the  asset  side.  Let  me
Suppose  they  manufacture  100  bikes  in  the  year,  and  if  they  are  selling  60  bikes,  then
■  Why  is  the  company  selling  only  60?  ■  How  much  do  their  competitors  sell?  ■  Where  does  the  company  stand  in  terms  of  competition?  ■  How  big  is  the  industry?  How  many  bikes  (across  all  companies)
■  Bajaj  Auto  sells  within  India  (domestic  market)  ■  Bajaj  Auto  also  sells  outside  India  (international  market)
From  the  extract,  we  can  quickly  note  that  Bajaj  Auto  sells  around  2M  vehicles  in  the
How  many  units  of  two-wheelers  and  CVs  does  Bajaj  Auto  sell  in  India  and  the
○  The  product  the  company  sells
○  Places  where  it  manufactures  the  products  ○  The  capacity  of  each  manufacturing  plant  ○  The  geographies  in  which  the  company  sells  ○  How  many  units  the  company  sells  across  all  their  markets
■  Add  up  the  sales  data  to  get  consolidated  bikes  and  CV  sales  data  ■  Input  the  historical  revenue  data  ■  Calculate  the  average  cost  of  sale  of  bike  and  CV  ■  Identify  the  trend  in  change  of  average  cost  of  sale  ■  Project  the  average  price  of  the  vehicle  and  reverse  engineer  the
The  idea  of  calculating  the  YoY  percentage  change  is  to  identify  consistent  trends  if  any.
Average  selling  price  of  a  vehicle  =  14815*(10^7)/2254617
Now,  let  us  assume  that  Ola  manufactures  and  sells  the  same  number  of  bikes  in  the
I  hope  it  is  clear  so  far.  In  year  3,  assume  Ola  does  not  add  any  Capex  but  rather  sells
The  depreciation  value  will  remain  the  same  at  7.74%.
If  none  of  that  is  available,  then  you  will  have  to  project  based  on  the  previous  trend.
If  the  above  technique  does  not  fit  well  with  your  approach,  let  the  debt  remain.  The
○  If  the  demand  for  the  IPO  is  more  than  the  issued  share  capital,  the  IPO
Share  capital  remains  pretty  unchanged,  at  least  for  Bata.  So  there  is  nothing  much  to
https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/cash-flow-statement/.
Where  Rf  =  Risk-free  rate  and  Rm  =  Equity  risk  premium.
Cost  of  capital  =  Risk-free  rate  +  Risk  premium
Valuation  (Part  3)  -  Risk  Premium  &  Tax  Shield
16.1  –  Market  risk  premium
You  can  think  about  it  this  way:  if  the  risk-free  rate  (Rf)  is  7%,  how  much  more  would
Re  =  Risk  free  rate  (Rf)  +  Risk  premium
The  risk  premium  is  the  additional  return  over  and  above  the  risk-free  return  to
Risk  premium  =  β*( Rm  –  Rf),  where
Let’s  take  an  example  and  see  how  this  works.  The  best  proxy  for  the  risk-free  rate  is
○  Equity  investors  expect  a  return  over  and  above  the  risk-free  rate  and  that
○  The  risk  premium  depends  on  the  beta  of  the  stock.  Higher  the  beta,
get  projected.  What  remains  are  the  cash  and  cash  balance  numbers  on  the
We  can  do  this  systematically  in  excel  –
I’ll  be  happy  to  buy  the  stock  anywhere  within  this  range,  preferably  at  the  lower  end,  as
●  The  stock’s  beta  represents  the  stock’s  riskiness  with  respect  to  the  market  and
However,thatisnʼthappening.Mostpeopledonʼtconsiderthesethingsworthwhile,andeventhosewhodo,penny-pinchwhenbuyingahealthinsuranceplan.Andifyouʼrewonderingwhythismaybethecase,letmeexplain.
However,despitetheseemingsimplicityhere,thereareinfinitelymanypossibilitiestoconsider.Whenyoutrytoparsethesepossibilities,youʼllbegintoseewhypeopledespisetheprospectofbuyinghealthinsurance.Itʼsachore.Acomplicatedmessofconditionsandexclusions.Aproductthatwillabandonyouwhenyouneeditthemost.
Theyhavelawyersdra ingpoliciesthatgivethemanextraedgeduringpayouts.Youdonʼthavethat.
Theyhaveexperienceontheirside.Youhavenone.
Butthatisnotfeasible.Insurancecontractshavetobestandardized.Itʼstheonlywayinsurancecompaniescansellpoliciestoalargegroupofindividuals.Theywillturntheirbackonyouifyouinsistonacustomcontract.Thatmeansyour
Unlikemosthealthinsuranceguidesthattryandwalkyouthroughthedefinitions,thisonewillbestructureddiﬀerently.Insteadofelaboratingonthetermsandconditions,wewillexplainthelogicbehindimposingtheminthefirstplace.Itʼslikethetitlesuggests — Thisisagameofcatandmouse.Whenthegongstrikesandtheclaimismade,youwanttoextracteverypenny,andtheinsurerwantstokeepeverypenny.Theonlyproblem — theinsurerhasawell-definedstrategytomitigateriskontheirend,butyoudonʼthaveone.
Sotheobjectivehereistoequipyouwithablueprint.Ablueprintthatwillwalkyouthroughthemanywaysinwhichinsurersandtheiraﬀiliatesprotecttheirinterests.Ablueprintthatwilloﬀeryouasneakpeekintotheirminds,soyouknowwhattodowhenyouhavetomakeyourpurchase.
Afewmonthsago,ayoungchapcametousseekinghelp — completelydistraughta erhisrejectedclaim.Theindividualinquestionhadboughtapolicyfromafamilyfriend — anagent.Atthetime,themanhadintimatedtotheagentthathehadbeendiagnosedwiththroatcancerafewyearsprior.Thetreatmenthadbeendeemedasuccess,andhewasincompleteremission.
Sowewerejustabouttobreakthebadnewswhenheinterjectedagain.Inarathercurttone,hearguedthathehaddisclosedhisconditiontotheagentbutcouldnʼtfindamentionofitinhispolicydocument.Hewasperplexedbythisoversight.Butassoonashedivulgedthisnewdetail,weknewwhathadhappened.
Humansarenotoriouslyrigid,butthrowsomeincentivesinthemix,andtheyʼllbecomeprettymalleable.Itʼsoneofthereasonswhytheinsuranceindustryisbuiltonaverycompetitiveincentivestructure.Itʼsaproductfewpeoplewanttobuy.Soyouhavetohavearatherextravagantcommissionstructure.Agents(includingus)getpaidalotofmoneywhenwemakeasale.Andsometimes,theseincentivescanturnperverse — forcingthesepeopletodothemostdespicablethings.
Cancerpatientsareano-go,eveniftheyareinremission.Nomatterhowhighyoupushthepremiums,itʼsunlikelytocompensateforthesubstantialrisksinsurancecompanieswilllikelytakewhentheycoversomebodydiagnosedwithcancer.Andwhilethismaycomeasasurprisetosomeofourreaders,industryincumbents(includingagents)haveknownthisdetailforever.
Anaveragehumanspendsabout8hoursofhisdaysleeping.Aboutanhoureachdayeating.Afewhoursareworking,andagoodchunkisdoingnothingsignificant.Mostdaysarenʼtveryeventful.Theylookthesame.Theyfeelthesame,andpeoplegotobedexpectingthisroutinetopersist.
Itʼsanexamplethatillustratesaclassicproblemthatplaguesthehumanmind — Ourlivedexperiencegivesusafalsesenseofsecurity.Itdistortsourperceptionofrisk.Andwhenbadthingsdohappen,wearewhollyunpreparedtodealwiththem.
Whenweaskpeopletopickacoverwhilebuyingahealthinsurancepolicy,mostpeoplechooseasumnomoresignificantthan₹2–3lakhs.Askthemtojustifythisresponse,andtheyʼllo enfallbackontheirlivedexperience.Hospitalisationsarerare.Andwhentheyhappen,itʼstheusualsuspectsdoingthedamage — Malaria,abrokenbone,orlousyappendicitis.Medicalexpensesseldomexceedthe₹2–3lakhmark,andacoverabovethissumseemsneedless.
Whatwillcrippleyou,however,isthebonemarrowtransplantthatcosts₹25lakhs.Ortherecurringcancertreatmentthatcanpushyoutothebrinkoffinancialruin.Youronlyoptionthenistobingeondebtorcrowdfundyourtreatment — Seekhelpfromfriendsandfamily.Ifthatdoesnʼtdo,youʼllhavetosettleforthepublichealthcaresystemandseewhattheycandoforyou.
Sure,thereisacasetobemadethattherelativelyinexpensivetreatments(₹1–2lakhs)arenʼttheonesyoushouldbeworriedabout.Thatitʼscancerandthetransplantsthatdothemostdamage.Butaskyourselfthis — Howexpensivedothesetreatmentsget?Whatkindofmoneydopeopleusuallyshelloutwhenrecoveringfromsuchailments?
Ifyouʼvemademassiveclaimsinthepastoryouhaveaheartcondition,insurancecompaniesmaynotaﬀordyouthatopportunity.Soifyouʼreseekingcomprehensiveprotectionforatleastthenexttenyears,thena₹5lakhcovermaynotcutit.
Butisthereacasetobemadeforalittlecover?Istherenoutilityonceyougolower?Well,ofcoursenot.Asyougetolder,theriskofhospitalisationincreasessomewhatdisproportionately,andyourpremiumcouldjumpmanifoldifyou
Remember,thelastthingyouwanttodoisbuyapolicy,paythosepremiumsdiligentlyforacoupleofyearsandthenforegoitaltogetherbecauseyoucanʼtputupthetips.Weroutinelyhearfrompeoplewhoabstainfromtheirpolicya erfallingshortoffunds.Onsomeoccasions,youcouldattributethismisfortuneoratightbudget.
○ Yourpremiumscouldalsoincreaseifyouaretransitioningbetweendiﬀerentagebands.Thinkofitthisway — Someinsurerswillseekhighercompensationfroma36-year-oldbutsettleforalowersumwhiledealingwithpeoplebetween25and35.However,asyougrowolderandcrossthe35-year-oldthreshold,theywillbumpupyourpremiumstocompensatefortheaddedriskyoucarry.Insurerswillhavetheirpricechartfordiﬀerentagebands,andtheywilladjustyourpremiumsasyoutransitionbetweenthem.
Whenyouapplythissimplemaximtoabusinessarrangement,itwilllikelybenefitbothparties.Lookatalltheexamplesaroundyou.Apilotwilllikelyheedsafetyinstructionsifherlifeisontheline.Achefwillprobablykeepacleanstationifhehastoeatthefoodhecooks.Afootsoldierislikelytofollowageneralifthegeneralisleadingfromthefront.Yourincentivesandpenaltiesalignwiththoseyouintendtoworkwith.Thatʼswhenyoutrulyhaveskininthegame.
Butintheinsurancebusiness,thingsarenʼtsostraightforward.Whenyoubuyahealthinsurancepolicy,thereʼsapuretransferofrisk,i.e.theinsurancecompanyisexpectedtocompensateyoufullyduringamedicalemergency.Youcandecidetosplurgeifyousowish,andinsurancecompanieswillbeobligatedtopayforeveryexpenseyouincur.Youhavenoskininthegameonceyouʼveboughtthepolicy.Andfromaninsurerʼspointofview,thisisamassiveproblem.Theywantyoutobeaccountableinsomeway.Theywantyoutobepenny-pinchingatthehospitalevenifyouwonʼtbepayingthebillyourself.Theywantyoutohavesomeskininthegame,andtothisextent,theydevisecleverschemestoprotecttheirdownside.
Youʼreabouttobuyhealthinsurance,andtheagentpitchesapolicywithacovertotalling₹5Lakhs.Thepriceisreasonable,at₹7000ayear,butyouwanttohagglesomemore.Andthatʼswhenhedropsthebigsurprise.Hepromisestocutdownthepremiumby25%(roughly₹1800/year)ifonlyyouagreetoa20%co-paymentclause.Wewilltalkaboutwhatthismeans,butrightnow,youʼrecaughtupinthemoment.Saving₹1800isabigdeal,soyousignoﬀontheagreementwithoutgivingitasecondthought.
Unfortunately,ninemonthslater,yousuﬀeranaccident.Youʼrehospitalisedandneedextensivecare,andthebilladdsupto₹2Lakh.Noproblem.Youʼvegotinsurance.However,theinsureronlypays₹1,60,000.Theyaskyoutopaytheremaining₹40,000outofpocketandremindyouoftheco-paymentclause.
Whenyoustartdoingthemath,youbegintoseehowlopsidedthisarrangementis.Yousaved₹1,800,sure.Butyouhadtopay₹40,000becauseoftheco-paymentclause.Itwouldtake~22yearsofpremiumsavingstomakeupforthisfatalmistake.Ontheflipside,thisisamassivevictoryfortheinsurer.Notonlydidtheymanagetosave₹40,000,buttheyalsogotyoutopenny-pinch.Onceyourealiseyouʼreobligatedtopay20%ofthebill,youʼllcutbackonallthefrivolousexpenses.Youʼllbookcheaperrooms.
Ifanything,co-paymentsseldommakesenseunlesstheyaremandatoryoryouʼrebuyingapolicyforsomeoneoldwithpre-existingdiseases.Inwhichcase,aco-paymentclausecanbringdownpremiumsdrastically.Butotherwise,youʼrebetteroﬀsimplyoptingoutofthisseeming“bargain.”
Well,ofcourse,youcould.Butyouhavetodothemathagain.
Theserentalcapsareabigno-no,andpeoplenowrealisethis.Thisiswhyinsurancecompaniesaregettingcreativewhilegoingabouttheirbusiness.Now,mostinsurersimposerestrictionsonthekindofroomsyoucanpick.Say — asingleprivateroomandnothingfancy.
Butifwedidthesamethinginthislineofwork,i.e.ifweletitbe,thenthatwouldhavecatastrophicconsequencesforeveryoneinvolved.Thestakesintheinsurancebusinesscanbeprettyhigh,andwemustcoursecorrectwhencustomerswalkonthisdangerouspath.Forinstance,manypeoplewespoketo(whenbuildingtheinsurancebusiness)routinelytalkedabouthowtheycouldoutwitinsurersifpushcametoshove.
Forstarters,theyʼlllikelyimposeapre-existingdiseasewaitingperiod.Itʼsacool-oﬀperiod(usually2–4years)duringwhichinsurerswillnotpayforcomplicationsarisingoutofsaidpre-existingcondition.Inthiscase — diabetes.Andtheymayevenimposeanextracharge — calledaloadingchargetocompensatefortherisktheyʼllbetakingonwhileinsuringadiabeticpatient.
Orperhapstakeapuntbyapproachingthecourts.Butthisisabattlethatyouwillnotwin.Youwonʼthavetimeonyourside,andyouwonʼthavethepatiencetofightitout.Itʼllprobablybemoreexpensivethantheinsuranceplanitself.In
Mypointhereisthis — Whenyouʼremakingthosedeclarationsandinsurancecompaniestakeyouatyourword,theyʼrenotdoingsobecausetheyʼregullible.Onthecontrary,theyareplayingthissmart.
Aroutinecomplaintfrommostcustomersisthatinsurancecompanieso engooverboardwiththiskindofthing.Thattheyrefusetopayoutaclaimevenwhenyouʼrebeinghonestwithyourdeclaration.Sayyouwereblissfullyunawareofapre-existingcondition,andyouonlyfindoutaboutthisatthetimeofhospitalisation;theinsurerisobligatedtopayouttheclaim.
Butifyoumakeaclaimonlyafewmonthsa erbuyingapolicy,theinsurermaysuspectfoulplayeitherway.Andifyourmedicalhistorylendscredencetotheideathatyoumayhavedeliberatelywithheldinformationaboutyourpre-existingcondition,theycanrepudiatetheclaimaltogether.
Bottomline — Itwouldbodewellforyouifyouwerecompletelytransparentaboutyourmedicalcondition.Thewaitingperiodandtheextrachargemaybeunsavoury,butitwonʼtbeasdreadfulasseeingyourclaimrejected.
Consider,forinstance,ifyouʼrediagnosedwithacataract.Itʼsearlydays,butyourdoctorrecommendsgettingsurgeryinthenextyearorso.Andsinceyouhavetimeonyourside,youdecidetooﬀsetallfuturemedicalexpensesbygettingyourselfahealthinsurancepolicy.
Bottomline — Youweresuckeredintobuyingapolicythatbarelypaysanything.Andwhilethereʼsnowayaroundmitigatingrisksassociatedwithspecific
Theydrawtheline(inmostcases)byaskingastraightforwardquestion — “Isthetreatmentdeemedmedicallynecessary,anddoesitsignificantlyimpairyourqualityoflife?”Iftheanswerisno,youʼllhaveatoughtimegettingtheinsurancecompanytopayup.Andwhilethisseemslikeareasonableexclusion,othersmayseemabitextreme.Forexample,insurancecompaniesarealsoknowntopermanentlyexcludealltreatmentsassociatedwithexternalcongenitaldiseases —visible conditionspresentfrombirth.
Areyoubuyingsomethingonanonlinegrocerydeliveryapp?Youʼllwantacouponcodethatgivesyouadiscount.
Instead,youʼllseesubtlediﬀerencesinpricingacrossdiﬀerentchannels.Supposeyouʼrebuyinginsurancethroughanoﬀlineagent.Inthatcase,itʼslikelythatyouwillhavetopayahighersumconsideringinsurancecompanieswillhavetocompensatefortheextracostassociatedwithrunningabrickandmortarfacility.
Putanotherway;youprobablywillgetasmalldiscountifyoubuythesameproductonline.Someinsurerswillalsohaveadiﬀerentpricingstructurewithintheonlinesub-domain.Theymayoﬀeryouasmalldiscountifyoubuythepolicydirectlyfromtheinsurerʼswebsitewhilenotextendingthesamebenefitelsewhere.
Andthisgivespeopletheimpressionthatitwouldbeprudenttobuythepolicyfromtheinsurerwithoutanintermediary.Andthatassessment,whilereasonablyaccurate,doeshaveafewissues.
Elsewhere,acrossonlinechannels,thiseﬀectisevenmorepronounced.Peoplebuyingapolicythroughanonlineintermediarywillalmostalwayscheckpriceswiththeinsurerdirectly.Theintermediaryisboundtolosewhenthepricedisparitybecomesevident.
Andthisispreciselywhyyourarelyseeanydiﬀerenceinpremiumswhencomparingpricesacrosstheintermediarychannelsandtheinsurerʼswebsiteonline.Evenwhensomeproductsboastadiﬀerence,thediscountsareusuallylimitedtolessthan5%ofthepremiumpaidduringthefirstyear.So,anybodypromisingyouasubstantialonlinevaluemaybedupingyou.
Butwhatkindofdiscountsareavailabletopeople?Howdoinsurancecompaniesincentiviseyoutobuytheirproduct?
Insomecases,youmaygetadiscountonpremiumsifyouprovethatyouʼrelivinghealthy.Manyinsurancecompaniesincentivisepeopletowalkdailyandalsohaveanapptotrackprogress.Ifyoumeetthequotaoverthespecifiedperiod,youʼllbeentitledtoadiscountwhilepayingthepremiumnextyear.Evenothersmayoﬀeradiscounttomedicalprofessionalsorwhenyoubuyapolicyfor 2or3yearsasopposedtothestandardtenureof12months.
Oncethegrouphasbeenidentified,theinsurancecompanywillneedtodra acustomcontractforthegroup.However,theywonʼtextendapolicytoeachindividual.Instead,theywilloﬀeraquotetothemasterpolicyholder.Inthiscase,thebank.Thebankwillthenchoosetopriceeachpolicy,andthatʼsthepremiumyouʼllhavetocoughup.
Also,thefeaturesinthegrouppolicywillbetailor-madebasedontherequirementsofthemasterpolicyholder,andyouwillhavelittleflexibilityonthisfront.Theupsideisthatyougetabetterprice,andonaverage,youcouldexpecttoseeagrouppolicysellataslightdiscountcomparedtoaretailpolicywithsimilarspecifications.
Also,youwillhaveyourpolicysolongasthemasterpolicyholdersurvives.Butifthemasterpolicyholderdecidestodissolvethegrouporiftheyceasetofunction,thenyouʼllhaveatoughchoicetomake.Theinsurerwillletyouswitchtoapersonalinsuranceplanfromthesuiteofproductsavailabletotheretail
public.Buttheymayassessyourriskonceagain.Ifyouhavediabetes,BPoranyotherdisease,youʼllbeaskedtopayalotmore.
Somewillarguethatthisisunlikelytohappenwithabanksincetheyrarelyevergobust.Andthatʼsanentirelyaccurateassessment.Butnotallgroupsarebuiltthisway.Manycompaniesfloatgroupplanswhilehavinglittlefinancialstabilitythemselves.Andthiscouldbedeeplyproblematicfortheircustomers,whomaynotfullyunderstandtheimplications.
However,thereʼsalsothefactthatemployeehealthinsurancepoliciesarenʼtalwaysthemostcomprehensiveproducts.Imean,Ihavetolookattheincentiveshere.Employersmustextendahealthplantotheiremployeesbecausethestateinsistsonit.Theyareexpectedtoshoulderapartoftheburdenbecausethereisamandatefromthetop.However,themandatetells
Also,youmaystillwanttobuyapersonalhealthplanevenifyouremployerisextendingone.Peopleo enswitchjobs,dabblewithentrepreneurshiporsimplyretirewhentheydonʼtfeelmotivatedanymore.
Thereo encomesatimeinpeopleʼsliveswhentheydonʼtwanttodothesamethingstheyʼvebeendoingalltheirlives.Atthispoint,theymayfindthemselvesatacrossroadsiftheydonʼthaveadequateprotection.Sure,youcouldbuyapersonalhealthinsurancepolicywhenyoumakethischoice.
Still,o en,thatavenuemaynotbeavailableifyouʼrealreadydealingwithadebilitatingdisease.Insurersmayrefusetoextendahealthpolicyor,insomecases,makeitludicrouslyexpensive.Soifyouhavesomemoneytospare,youshouldundoubtedlyconsiderbeefingupyouremployeehealthinsurancepolicywithapersonalplan.
Inthisdomain,companieshavetobecreative.Theyhavetohaveanedge.Theymustconvincecustomersthattheirproductsarebestsuitedforthemasses.Andtoenticethesepeople,theyʼllwhipupcreationswithcows,bellsandwhistles.Onpaper,theyʼllseemlikeanabsolutebargain.Andthesalesfolkwillconvince
Onotheroccasions,theirpre-authorizecanonlybedescribedas“modestatbest”Onecustomerweʼvedealtwithhadabilltotalling₹twolakhswiththeinsureronlypre-authorizing₹50,000atfirst.Hedideventuallymanagetogettheremaining₹1.5lakhreimbursed.Butitwasparticularlydishearteningatthemoment,knowingtheywouldnʼtpre-authorizethewholething.
O enpeopleconflatewellnesstherapieswithlegitimatetreatmentssincethelineissoblurryinthisdomain.Afewfacilitiesarenʼtequippedtodealwithhospitalizations,andinsurancecompaniesrarelypaytheseclaims.Sowhilethefeaturemaynotbeagimmickperse,youʼdhaveatoughjobconvincinginsurancecompaniestopayforthesetreatmentsanyhow.
Theoriginalusecasefortherestorationbenefitwashonestlystellar.Peoplewhoboughtafamilyfloaterplano enmoanedaboutthelackofprotectiontheyreceivedwhilstsubscribingtosuchpolicies.Andyoucouldseewhytheyhadagrouse.Whenyouʼreafamilyof4livingtogetherinthesamehousehold,therisksareo encorrelated.Ifcovidaﬀectsanindividualinthefamily,itmightaﬀecteveryoneinvolved.Ifyouʼreinvolvedinanaccident,itʼslikelytohaveyourfamilyandkidsalongsideyou.Whentragiceventstranspire,youmayhavetowitnessmultiplehospitalizationssimultaneously,andasinglecovermaynotcutit.
Butatsomepoint,insurersbeganrecognizingtheaddedcostsassociatedwiththeseactsofbenevolence.Sure,theystillneededtomarketthefeaturetocompeteinacutthroatindustry,buttheyalsoneededtomitigatesomerisks.Andthatʼswhentheydabbledwithwordplayonceagain.Theideawastomarkettherestorationbenefitacrossallchannelsandmakeitharderforpeopletostakeclaimtothisbenefitbyaddingafewadditionalconditions.
Forinstance,someinsurerswilltellyouthattheyʼllrestoretheCoversolongasyouʼremakingclaimsfortwoseparateillnesses.Intheexamplewequotedearlier,theinsurerwouldrestorethebodya eryoursurgerybutthenrefusetoletyouusetheextratenlakhsifyouhadtoundergochemotherapy.Theirrationalefordoingso?Youʼreusingthebenefittotreatthesameillness.Andaccordingtothepolicydocument,thatʼsano-go.
Verdict:Notagimmick,but“buyerbeware.”
Almosteverypolicyweʼvereviewedcoverspre-andpost-hospitalizationexpenses.Theonlythingsettingthemapartisthequantumofprotection.Somepolicieswillcoverallcostsincurredduringthe15daysthatprecedehospitalizationand30daysa erwards.Othermorerobustpolicieswillpayoﬀallexpensesovermoreextendedperiods—forinstance,allcostsincurredduringthetwomonthsthatprecedehospitalizationandsixmonthspost-hospitalization.
Supposeyoubuyapolicywithasuminsuredof₹tenlakhsandano-claimbonusof50%.Andyougoanentireyearwithoutmakingaclaim.Atthispoint,theinsurerwillincreaseyourCoverby50%,andyoucouldendupboastingacoverof₹15lakhsthefollowingyearifyouchoosetorenewthepolicy.Ifyougoanotheryearwithoutmakingaclaim,yoursuminsuredwilljumpupbyanextra50%(overthebasefigureof₹tenlakhs),andyouʼdhavetotalprotectionworth₹20lakhs.
Hereʼsthething — Whenyouparsethroughahospitalbill,youʼllalmostalwaysseelineitemsthatareabitdubious.TVmonitors,administrativecharges,glovesandmasksforattendants,telephonebillsetc.Theseareexpensesthatinsurancecompaniesseldomcoversincetheydonʼthaveahandleonhowmedicalpractitionersdeploytheseassets.Thehospitalcouldbillaninsurancecompanyfor20PPEkits,andthecompanywouldhavenowayofverifyingthisdetail.Thisiswhysuchexpensesareo enexcluded.Andsinceinsurersdonʼtcoverthese
However,insurancecompaniesareexactwiththeirlanguage.Theyʼllcovercancer,sure,buttheyʼllonlydoitifyouʼreinflictedwithcancerofspecifiedseverity.Soyouʼdbewelladvisedtoreadtheentirelistverycarefully.Thelastthingyouʼdwantistobuyoneofthepoliciesandthendisputetheinterpretationofthelanguage.Anditʼsnotapleasantexperienceevenifthesepoliciessellforlowdirtprices.
However,healthinsurancecompaniesdonʼto enextendsuchabenefit.Theonesthatdoareo endubioussincethepricingissubjecttochange.Youdonotwanttopayamodestsumforfiveyearsandsuddenlyfindoutthatyourpremiumshaveincreasedbyawhopping50%overnight.Itʼsnotagreatfeeling,soitistoavailofthisbenefitwhilebuyingagoodtermplan.Thatshouldtakecareofthat.
insuredbyafewlakhsandpayahe yadditionalpremium,oryoucouldbuyatop-uppolicyandgettheextraprotectionyouneedatarelativelylowerpremium.
Byrelativelylow,Imeandown.Onetop-uppolicywithacoverof₹50lakhssellsforaslowas₹1000ayear.
Thereʼsnorulemandatingthatyoumustpaythedeductibleoutofpocket.Youcouldalsouseanotherinsuranceplantopayitoﬀ.Butoncethatʼstakencareof,thetop-upwillkickinandsettlewhatʼsle ,solongastheclaimisvalid.
Supposeyouremployeroﬀersyouahealthinsuranceplanwithacovertotalling₹5Lakhs.Itʼsadecentfigure,butthereʼsapossibilitythatyoumaywanttoaddabitofextraprotection.Soyoudecidetobuyyourselfatop-uppolicy.Andwhenyoudoso,theinsurerwillhavetwoquestionsforyou.
Thecoveroptionsareusuallyquitehe yinthecaseoftop-uppolicies.Theycanbeginat₹20lakhsandgouptoacroreinsomecases.Soyouʼllhavemanyoptionstochoosefrom.Deductibleoptions,ontheotherhand,arepretty
Theonlythingtorememberisthis:Makesurethatyoubuythesupertop-uppolicyrightaroundthetimeyourenewtheemployeeinsuranceplan.Thedateshavetolineup.Iftheydonʼt,thereʼsapossibilitythatthingsmaynotworkoutwellforyou.Hereʼsanexample
January3rd2021:Youbuyasupertop-upplanwitha₹5lakhdeductibleforsomeaddedprotection.
Also,notethattheseproductsaresellingatdirt-cheapprices.Andifthereʼsanythingweʼvelearntsofar,thereʼsnosuchthingasafreelunch.Wedonʼtthinkthepricingissustainable,andacorrectionmaybeduesoon.
Thereʼsalsothefactthatgeneralinsurers(insurersthatdabbleinhealth,life,motoretc.)reportsettlementfiguresforalltheirbusinessestogether.Incontrast,standalonehealthinsurancecompaniessaysettlementfiguresforthehealthbusinessalone(sincetheydonʼtdabbleinanythingelse).Soacompanymayboastahighsettlementratiobypayingoutallthemotorinsuranceclaimswhileskimpingonthehealthclaims.Inthiscase,youmaywanttoaskyourinsurerformorespecificnumbersbeforemakingadecision.
Thatis — Youtakethetotalclaimspaidoutbyaninsurerduringtheyearandthendivideitbythepremiumstheycollectduringthesameperiod,andvoila,yougetICR.Mostpeopleusethisfiguretoseeiftheirinsurerisfinanciallystable,i.e.Ifthereʼsacompanypayingout₹120inclaimswhileonlycollecting₹100innetpremiums,youcansafelyassumethattheinsurerislosingmoney.Andifthispatternpersists,thenthereʼsagenuinerisktheymaygounder.
Butthisisnʼtareasontopanic.Theregulatorwonʼtjustletthecompanydieandleaveallthepolicyholdersinalurch.Instead,theywilljumpinandforceamerger.However,itcanbeanunsavouryexperience.SoahighICRismostcertainlynotagoodthing.
Verdict:ClaimSettlementRatioisnotagimmick,butyouneedmuchmorecontextbeforemakingachoice.YoucanfindthemostaccuratenumbersinIRDAIʼsannualreport.
Whenyoufigureyourinsuranceisnogood,youhavetwooptionsinfrontofyou.Youcanditchitandbuyanewplanorportyourpolicy.
Tothelayperson,thismaycomeasasurprise,buttheyare,infact,twoverydiﬀerentthings.Whenyouʼrebuyinganewpolicy,itʼsafreshstartforallpartiesinvolved,asdiscussedearlier.Doyouhaveapre-existingdisease?Waitthree3yearsbeforemakingaclaim?Doyouwanttogetyourcataractssorted?Waittwoyears.Youwanttoclaima er20daysofbuyingthepolicy.Sorry,youʼvegottowaitsomemore.
Itcannotbeverypleasant.Anditcanbeparticularlyirritatingifyouʼvealreadydonetheirbiddingonce.Ifyouʼvehadapolicyforthreeyears,youʼdlikelyhavefullycompliedwithalltherestrictions.Whenyouwanttoswitchandbuyanewapproach,theinsurerwantsyoutodothesamethingagain.Preposterous.
Itʼsincumbentonyoutoprovethiswithmaterialdocumentsonrecord.Ifyouwantthespecificillnesswaitingperiodwaived,youmustshowthemthatyouʼveheldtheoldpolicyforatleasttwoyears.Supposeyoutohforhavehadthethreeyearspre-existingdiseasewaitingperiodwaivedoﬀ.Inthatcase,youʼvetoproducedocumentsshowingthatyouʼveheldtheoldpolicyforthreeyears,explicitlymentioningthepre-existingcondition.Ifitʼsanewconditionyouonlyrecentlydiscovered,youcanʼtexpecttheinsurertowaiveoﬀthewaitingperiods.Amentionofthisdiseasewillhavetobemadeonthepolicydocument,andthatʼstheonlyonethatworks.
So,portingisalmostalwaysamoreprudentalternative,andyoushouldalwaysconsiderthiswhilebuyinganewpolicy.
Buying a stock through the trading terminal
What happens when you buy a stock
What happens when you sell a stock
When it comes to investing one has to choose an asset class that suits the individual’s risk and
An asset class is a category of investment with particular risk and return characteristics. The fol-
These are investable instruments with very limited risk to the principle and the
Investment in Equities involves buying shares of publicly listed companies. The
Real Estate investment involves transacting (buying and selling) commercial and
Investments optimally should have a strong mix of all asset classes. It is smart to diversify your
For instance, a young professional may be able take a higher amount of risk given his age and
allocates investments across asset classes is dependent on the risk appetite of the investor.
1.Risk and Return go hand in hand. Higher the risk, higher the return. Lower the risk, lower is
relatively less risky. However you have the risk of losing money when you adjust the return for
are net net losing 1% per annum. Fixed income investment is best suited for ultra risk averse
amounts. Liquidity is another issue with real estate investment – you cannot buy or sell
whenever you want. You always have to wait for the right time and the right buyer or seller to
3.Choose an instrument that best suits your risk and return appetite
means buying and selling. For all practical purposes, you can’t buy/sell shares of a public com-
buyer of a share, the stock market helps you meet the seller and vice versa.
ing your transactions (buying and selling of shares).
Acts like a vault for the shares that you buy.
you buy shares these shares sit in your
DEMAT account. This is maintained
and maintain you DEMAT account
Whenever you want to buy or sell shares
From the time you access the market – let’s just say, to buy a stock till the time the stocks comes
and hits your DEMAT account, a bunch of corporate entities are actively involved in making this
count with the broker which lets the investor to buy/sell securities.
3.Provide support – Dealing support if you have to call and trade. Software support if you have
When you buy a property the only way to identify and claim that you actually own the prop-
Likewise when you buy a share (a share represents a part ownership in a company) the only way
tal format share certificate is called “Dematerialization” often abbreviated as DEMAT .
The share certificate in DEMAT format has to be stored digitally. The storage place for the digital
share certificate is the ‘DEMAT Account’ . A Depository is a financial intermediary which oﬀers the
service of Demat account. A DEMAT account in your name will have all the shares in electronic for-
mat you have bought. Think of DEMAT account as a digital vault for your shares.
As you may have guessed, the trading account from your broker and the DEMAT account from the
So for example if your idea is to buy Infosys shares then all you need to do is open your trading ac-
count, look for the prices of Infosys and buy it. Once the transaction is complete, the role of your
trading account is done. After you buy, the shares of Infosys will automatically come and sit in
Likewise when you wish to sell Infosys shares, all you have to do is open your trading account and
sell the stock. This takes care of the transaction part…however in the backend, the shares which
are sitting in your DEMAT account will get debited, and the shares move out of your DEMAT ac-
At present there are only two depositaries oﬀering you DEMAT account services. They are The Na-
count, you cannot walk into a Depository to open a DEMAT account. To open a DEMAT account
you need to liaison with a Depository Participant (DP). A DP helps you set up your DEMAT account
three diﬀerent accounts - trading account, DEMAT account and Bank account. All the three ac-
transactions. For example if you were to buy 1 share of Biocon at Rs.446 per share there must be
a) Identify the buyer and seller and match the debit and credit process
party. For instance the seller after selling the shares should not be in a position to back out
transactions (buying and selling of financial instruments like shares)
against your name in your account. Your account with the DP is called the ‘DEMAT’ account
6.To open a DEMAT account with one of the depositaries you need to liaison with a Depository
the bar and branch out across the country. They also decide to diversify the company by manufac-
diversified their product portfolio plus they have a presence across all the major cities in the
3.Angel investors take maximum risk. They take in as much risk as the promoter
11.Venture Capitalists invest at an early stage in business; they do not take as much risk as
16.In terms of risk, PE’s have a lower risk appetite as compared to VC or angels
any valid reason – for CAPEX, restructuring debt, rewarding shareholders etc
3.Whenever you buy a share of a company, you are in essence taking the same amount of risk as
the promoter is taking. Needless to say, the proportion of the risk and its impact will depend on
the quantity of shares you hold. Nonetheless, whether you like it or not, when you buy shares
you also buy risk. So when the company goes public, the promoter is actually spreading his risk
angel investors, venture capitalist, PE funds; can use this opportunity to sell their shares in the
open market. By selling their shares, they get an exit on their initial investment in the company.
They can also choose to sell their shares in smaller chunks if they wish.
2.Reward employees –Employees working for the company would have shares allotted to
125 to 150 Crs. The remainder has to come from internal accruals. So naturally, the more money
•Underwrite shares – By underwriting shares, merchant bankers essentially agree to buy all or
part of the IPO shares and resell the same to public
g.Risks involved in the business
daily on the stock exchange. People start buying and selling the stocks regularly.
1.Companies go public to raise funds, provide an exit for early investors, reward employees
Like we discussed in chapter 2, the stock market is an electronic market place. Buyers and sellers
If T1 trades as per his point of view, he should be a seller of the Infosys stock.
If T2 trades as per his point of view, he should be a buyer of the Infosys stock.
So at, Rs.3, 000 T1 will be a seller, and T2 will be a buyer in Infosys.
Now both T1 and T2 will place orders to sell and buy the stocks respectively through their respec-
cuted. This is the primary job of the stock market – to create a market place for the buyer and
b.If you were to place a trade on Infosys, what would it be? Would be a buy or a sell?
made market participants tend to buy the stock at any given price and this cascades into a stock
1 10:00 3000 3002 He buys 3002
2 10:01 3002 3006 He buys 3006
3 10:03 3006 3011 He buys 3011
4 10:05 3011 3016 He buys 3016
Notice, whatever prices the seller wants the buyer is willing to pay for it. This buyer-seller reac-
The answer to the second question is now quite simple; you buy Infosys stocks      considering the
Infosys. Hence all IT companies are likely to witness a selling pressure.
there is news or not, market participants would like to buy or sell the company’s shares and there-
In some cases there would be no news but still the price could move due to the demand and sup-
You have decided to buy 200 shares of Infosys at 3030, and hold on to it for 1 year. How does it ac-
tually work? What is the exact process to buy it? What happens after you buy it?
With your decision to buy Infosys, you need to login to your trading account (provided by your
stock broker) and place an order to buy Infosys. Once you place an order, an order ticket gets gen-
a. Details of your trading account through which you intend to buy Infosys shares – there-
b. The price at which you intend to buy Infosys
c.The number of shares you intend to buy
money to buy these shares. If yes, then this order ticket hits the stock exchange. Once the order
hits the market the stock exchange (through their order matching algorithm) tries to find a seller
who is willing to sell you 200 shares of Infosys at 3030.
Now the seller could be 1 person willing to sell the entire 200 shares at 3030 or it could be 10 peo-
ple selling 20 shares each or it could be 2 people selling 1 and 199 shares respectively. The permu-
shares are available to you as long as there are sellers in the market.
Once the trade is executed, the shares will be electronically credited to your DEMAT account. Like-
wise the shares will be electronically debited from the sellers DEMAT account.
After you buy the shares, the shares will now reside in your DEMAT account. You are now a part
kind of risk they are willing to take in the market. Irrespective of what they do, they can be catego-
ties based on risk and reward. He is unbiased toward going long or going short. We will discuss
ward his positions. He is risk averse and does not like taking overnight risk. For example – He
would buy 100 shares of TCS at 2212 at 9:15AM and sell it at 2220 at 3:20 PM making a profit of
would buy 10,000 shares of TCS as 2212 at 9:15 and sell it 2212.1 at 9.16. He ends up making
have noticed a scalp trader is highly risk averse.
risks. For example – He would buy 100 shares of TCS at 2212 on 12th June 2014 and sell it 2214
An investor is a person who buys a stock expecting a significant appreciation in the stock. He is
nificantly because of emerging industry and macro trends. A classic example in the Indian con-
text would be buying Hindustan Unilever, Infosys, Gillette India back in 1990s. These companies
ket sentiment thereby making a great value buy. An example of this in recent times is L&T . Due
1.A stock market is a place where a trader or an investor can transact (buy, sell) in shares
2.A stock market is a place where the buyer and seller meet electronically
4.The stock exchange electronically facilitate the meeting of buyers, and sellers
6.Demand supply mismatch also makes the stock prices move
10.Traders, and investors diﬀer on two counts – risk taking ability and the holding period.
would say markets are down, and if there is a mixed trend, you would say markets are sideways!
one asks you how the markets are doing, you would just check the general trend of these se-
Information – The index reflects the general market trend for a period of time. The
buy the index at 6,600. After all, the index is the representation of the broader economy.
will explore this topic in the risk management module.
Trend - A term ‘trend’ usually refers to the general market direction, and its associated
strength. For example, if the market is declining fast, the trend is said to be bearish. If the market
is trading flat with no movement then the trend is said to be sideways.
reaches 52 week high, then it indicates a bullish trend for the foreseeable future. Similarly if a
stock has hits 52 week low, some traders believe that it indicates a bearish trend for a foreseeable
trade. For example if you have bought or intend to buy Biocon shares then you are said to be long
tures of Smartphone) recently entered into an exclusive partnership with Flipkart to sell their flag-
Rs.14,000/-. If one wished to buy Mi3, he had to be a registered Flipkart user, the phone was not
promptly registered to buy the phone, but my colleague Rajesh had not. Though he wanted to
buy the phone, he could not because he had not registered on time.
Out of sheer desperation, Rajesh walked up to me, and made an oﬀer. He said, he is willing to buy
the phone from me at Rs. 16,500/-. Being a trader at heart, I readily agreed to sell him the phone!
In fact I even demanded him to pay me the money right away.
could always buy the phone on Flipkart, and pass on the new unopened box to Rajesh. My only
Going back to stock markets, think about this very simple transaction – on day 1 you buy shares
of Wipro at Rs.405, two days later (day 3) the stock moves and you sell your shares at Rs.425. You
In this transaction your first leg of the trade was to buy Wipro at Rs.405, and the second leg was
to sell Wipro at Rs.425, and you were bullish on the stock.
You sell the stock at Rs.425, and 2 days later assuming the stock trades at Rs.405, you buy it back.
If you realize the first leg of the trade was to sell at Rs.425, and the second leg was to buy the
stock at Rs.405. This is always the case with shorting – you first sell at a price you perceive as high
with an intention of buying it back at a lower price at a later point in time.
You have actually executed the same trade as buying at Rs.405 and selling at Rs.425 but in re-
An obvious question you may have – How can one sell Wipro shares without owning it. Well you
When you first sell, you are essentially borrowing it from someone else in the market, and when
you buy it back, you actually return the shares back. All this happens in the backend, and the
stock on your behalf. When you buy the stocks back, the exchange will ensure the stocks are re-
yourself by selecting the stock you wish to short, and click on sell
tion. If you are long on a stock squaring oﬀ the position means to sell the stock. Please remem-
ber, when you are selling the stock to close an existing long position you are not shorting the
When you are short on the stock, squaring oﬀ position means to buy the stock back. Remember
when you buy it back, you are just closing an existing position and you are not going long!
Volume – Volumes and its impact on the stock prices is an important concept that we will
explore in greater detail in the technical analysis module. Volumes represent the total transac-
tions (both buy and sell put together) for a particular stock on a particular day. For example, on
17th June 2014, the volume on ACC was 5, 33,819 shares.
Long Buy Sell Bullish Stock goes up Stock price
Short Sell Buy Bearish Stock goes
strument is traded. Each financial instrument is characterized by its risk and reward parameters.
nies are traded under the equity segment abbreviated as EQ. So if you were to buy or sell shares
70                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
71                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
72                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
73                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
 Volumes – Gives a sense on how many shares are being traded at a particu lar point
you will find Buy, Sell, Market Depth and Stock Information. If you click on Marketdepth,
74                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
and Rs.262.15 respectively. The volume for the day is close to 27 lakh shares.
9.4 – Buying a stock thro ugh the trading terminal
Our goal is to buy 1 share of ITC. We now have ITC in our trading terminal, and we are
convinced that buying ITC at Rs.261, which is roughly Rs.1.25 lesser than the last traded
The first step for this process  would be to invoke what is called a buy order form.
o Hover over the stock you want to Buy and click on the Buy Icon(B)
o This will invoke the Buy. When the buy order form is invoked, the following order form
75                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
limit our buy price to Rs.261. In such a situation where we are particular about the price
You can also opt for a  market order  when you intend to buy at market available prices
order, as long as there are sellers available, your order will go through and ITC will be
A stop loss order  protects you from an adverse movement in the market after initiating
a position. Suppose you buy ITC at Rs.262.25 with an expectation that ITC will hit Rs.275
stop loss order gets active and hits the exchange and you will be out of the loss making
position. As long as the price is above 255 the stop loss order will be dormant.
A stop loss order is a passive order. In order to activate it, we need to enter a trigger
price. A trigger price, usually above the stop loss price acts as a price threshold and
only af ter crossing this price the stop loss order transitions from a passive order to an
76                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
has to be higher than the stop loss price. We can set this to Rs.256.  If the price drops to
Rs.256 from 255 the stop loss  order gets active.
Going back to the main buy order entry form, once the order type is selected we now
move directly to the quantity. Remember the task is to buy 1 share of ITC; hence we
Select CNC for delivery trades. Meaning if your intention is to buy and hold the shares
demat account.  Selecting CNC is your way of communicating this to your broker.
Rs.261. As soon as the price drops to Rs.26 (and assuming there are sellers willing to
sell 1 shares) you order gets through, and is eventually executed. As soon as your order
77                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
 Modify the orders – For example if you wa nt to modify the buy order from 332 to 333
If you notice, there is an open order to buy 1 share of ITC at Rs.261.
78                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
The trade book confirms that the user executed an order to buy 1 share of ITC at Rs
You now officially own 1 share of ITC. This share wil l reside in our DEMAT account till
79                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
volume s were 3.6 million shares.
80                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
Besides the basic information about the LTP, OHLC, and volume we can also dig a bit
If you want to buy a share, you obviously need t o buy it from a seller. The seller will sell
the shares at a price that he thinks is fair enough. The price that the sellers  ask you  is
81                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
The first ask price is Rs.3294.80. At this particular moment, this is the best price to buy
sellers (both of them are selling 1 share each). The next best price is Rs. 3294.85. At this
price there are 4 shares available being offered by 2 different sellers. The third best
price is Rs.3295 at which 8 shares are available, and this price is offered by two sellers.
exchanges give priority to sellers willing to sell their shares at the least possible price.
Notice even if you want to buy 10 shares at Rs.3294.8 you can only buy 2 shares because
there are only 2 sellers at Rs.3294.8. However,  if you are not particular about the price
If you want to sell a share, you obviously need to sell it to a buyer willing to buy it from
you. The buyer will buy the shares at a price that he thinks is fair enough. The price that
the buyer demands is called the ‘bid price’. The bid price is highlighted in blue. Let us
price at which you can sell shares is at Rs.3294.75, and at this price you can only sell 10
shares as there are only 5 buyers willing to buy from you.
82                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
which the buyers and sellers are stacked up. It is extremely important for you to
understand how the buyers and sellers are placing their trades especially if you are an
set up a market watch, transact (buy and sell) in stocks, view the order and trade book,
4. To buy a stock you need to invoke a buy order form by pressing ‘B’ key. Likewise, to
sell a stock you need to invoke a sell order form by pressing ‘S’ key
6. You choose CNC as product type if you want to buy and hold the stock across
83                                                             zerodha.com/varsity
plore what happens behind the scene from the time you buy a stock to the time it hits your DE-
10.2 - What happens when you buy a stock?
Assume on 23rd June 2014 (Monday) you buy 100 shares of Reliance Industries at Rs.1,000/- per
share. The total buy value is Rs.100,000/- (100 * 1000). The day you make the transaction is re-
remember, the money goes out of your account but the stock has not come into your DEMAT ac-
The day after you made the transaction is called the T+1 day. On T+1 day you can sell the stock
“Buy Today, Sell Tomorrow” (BTST) or “Acquire Today, Sell Tomorrow” (ATST). Remember the
stock is not in your DEMAT account yet. Hence, there is a risk involved, and you could be in trou-
ble for selling a stock that you don’t really own. This doesn’t mean, every time you do a BTST
DEMAT account by end of day. Similarly money which was debited from you is credited to the per-
The shares will now start reflecting in the DEMAT account indicating that you own 100 shares of
So for all practical purposes if you buy a share on day T Day, you can expect to receive the shares
in your DEMAT account only by end of T+2 day. The shares are available for transaction on
10.3 - What happens when you sell a stock?
The day you sell the stocks is again called the trade day, represented as ‘T Day’ . The moment you
sell the stock from your DEMAT account, the stock gets blocked .Before the T+2 day the blocked
3.When you buy a share, the same will be reflected in your DEMAT account by end of T+2 day
5.When you sell shares, the shares are blocked immediately and the sale proceeds credited
also to determine whether to buy or sell a particular stock.
would make sense for the company to reward its shareholders thereby repaying the trust the
poses if you want to be entitled for dividend you need to ensure you buy the shares before the ex
A bonus issue is a stock dividend, allotted by the company to reward the
share of a company is very high and it becomes tough for new investors to buy shares. By issuing
ment value/market capitalization remains the same similar to bonus issue. The stock is split with
tion price/right issue price it is obviously cheaper to buy it from the open market.
A buyback can be seen as a method for company to invest in itself by buying
shares from other investors in the market. Buybacks reduce the number of
shares outstanding in the market, however buyback of shares is an important
There could be many reasons why corporates choose to buy back shares..
5.To support the share price from declining in the markets
When a company announces a buy back, it signals the company’s confidence about itself. Hence
2.Dividends are means of rewarding the shareholders. Dividend is announced as a percentage
4.A bonus issue is a form of stock dividend. This is the company’s way of rewarding the
7.Buy back signals a positive outlook of the promoters. This also conveys to the shareholders
creased spending which means the sellers tend to increase prices leading to inflation.
1.Increased cigarette prices discourage smokers from buying cigarettes (needless to say this is
decreases. If the profitability decreases then investors may want to sell shares of ITC.
2. If market participants start selling ITC, then the markets will come down because ITC is an
the modules that we will cover in Varsity.
9.Risk Management & Trading Philosophy
The idea of ‘Varsity at Zerodha’ is to put up a repository of high quality market related educa-
sis, derivatives, trading strategies, risk management, financial modeling etc. Each main topic is
risk management, discipline, market timing, access to information etc as the key to be successful
you think the stock is going up, your POV is bullish hence you would be a buyer of the stock. Like-
wise if you think a stock is going down your POV is bearish therefore you would be a seller of the
To develop a point of view, one needs to develop a systematic approach to analyze the markets.
There are a few methods using which you can figure out/ analyze what to buy or sell. They are:
oping a POV (whether to buy or sell stocks) based on a particular method of analysis -
mentals factors aligned, the stock looks bullish hence the stock is a buy.
TA based POV – The MACD indicator has turned bullish along with a bullish engulfing candlestick
is prudent to expect a reversion to mean; therefore the stock is a sell.
Outside view – The analyst on TV is recommending a buy on the stock therefore the stock is a
1.Buy the stock in the spot market
2.Buy the stock in the derivatives markets.
a.Within derivatives you can choose to buy the futures
of a great budget announcement, but I don’t want to risk much) then it would be prudent to
Also by now, hopefully you have got a sense of how all the diﬀerent modules in “Varsity” play an
So keeping this in background, go ahead and explore the content on Varsity at Zerodha.
start calibrating your trades with eﬀective risk management techniques.
allows company to route funds through OFS  only if the Promoters want to sell out their
above will be settled by the exchange into the investor Demat account in T+1 Days.
is declared based on the demand and the additional shares allotted are listed on the
1. Price at which one should buy and sell stocks
index but also helps you define the trade keeping in mind the entry, exit and risk
To your surprise, there are many vendors selling different varieties of food.
Option 1: You visit a vendor, figure out what they are cooking / selling. Check on the
based on the current trend aka the preference of the market.
4. Risk – Often traders initiate a trade for a certain reason, however in case of an
price variables namely – open high, low, close, volume etc.
fundamental analysis includes analyzing rainfall, harvest, demand, supply, inventory
However the concept of technical analysis will remain the same irrespective of the
convergence divergence’ (MACD) or ‘Relative strength index’ (RSI) is used exactly the
trading data (price and volume) and what information this data can provide about
example there could be an insider in the company buying the company’s stock in
analyst that this could be a good buy.
3) Price moves in trend –  All major moves in the market is an outcome of a trend.
The concept of trend is the foundation of technical analysis. For example the recent
at it is, once the trend is established, the price moves in the direction of the trend.
4) History tends to repeat itself – In the technical analysis context, the price trend
react to price movements in a remarkably similar way, each and every time the price
moves in a certain direction. For example in up trending markets, market
participants get greedy and want to buy irrespective of the high price. Likewise in a
down trend, market participants want to sell irrespective of the low and unattractive
identify the generic trend of the security. However the disadvantage of the line chart
is also its simplicity. Besides giving the analysts a view on the trend, the line chart
Also note, a long bodied candle depicts strong buying or selling activity. A short
2.  Line chart can be used to interpret trends but besides that no other information
structure of the candlestick however remains the same
comes with an in built risk mechanism. Candlesticks gives an insight into both entry
o Buy strength and sell weakness – Strength is represented by a bullish (blue)
candle and weakness by a bearish (red) candle. Hence whenever you are buying
ensure it is a blue candle day and whenever you are selling, ensure it’s a red candle
o Look for a prior trend – If you are looking at a bullish pattern, the prior trend
1. Buy strength and sell weakness
longer the candle, the more intense is the buying or selling activity. If the candles
1. Buy strength and sell weakness
look for prior trend. A Marubuzo can appear anywhere in the chart irrespective of
the prior trend, the trading implication remains the same.
A bullish marubuzo indicates that there is so much buying interest in the stock that
the market participants were willing to buy the stock at every price point during the
matter what the prior trend has been, the action on the marubuzo day suggests that
sessions. Hence a trader should look at buying opportunities with the occurrence of
a bullish marubuzo. The buy price should be around the closing price of the
one would be a buyer of the stock. The trade setup for this would be as follows:
Buy Price = Around 1028.4 and Stoploss = 970.0
Having decided to buy the stock, when do we actually buy the stock? The answer to
this depends on your risk appetite. Let us assume there are two types of trader with
different risk profiles – the risk taker and the risk averse.
The risk taker would buy the stock on the same day as the marubozu is being
forming a marubozu and therefore you can buy the stock around the closing price.
It is also very important to note that the risk taker is buying on a bullish/blue candle
day, thereby following rule 1 i.e buy on strength and sell on weakness.
The risk averse trader would buy the stock on the next day i.e the day after the
pattern has been formed. However before buying the trader needs to ensure that
the day is a bullish day to comply with the rule number 1. This means the risk averse
buyer can buy the stock only around the close of the day. The disadvantage of
buying the next day is that the buy price is way above the suggested buy price, and
therefore the stoploss is quite deep. However as a trade off the risk averse trader is
buying only after doubly confirming that the bullishness is indeed established.
As per the ACC’s chart above, both the risk taker and the risk averse would have
Here is another example (Asian Paints Ltd) where both the risk taker, and the risk
Here is an example where the risk averse trader would have benefited :
Notice in the chart above, a bullish marubuzo has been encircled. The risk taker
would have initiated a trade to buy the stock on the same day around the close, only
to book a loss on the next day. However the risk averse would have avoided buying
the rule, we should buy only on a blue candle day and sell on a red candle day.
What if after buying, the market reverses its direction and the trade goes wrong?
Like I had mentioned earlier, candlestick patterns comes with a inbuilt risk
a stoploss. So after you initiate a buy trade , in case the markets moves in the
Here is an example where the bullish marubuzo qualified as a buy for both the risk
averse and the risk taker. The OHLC is : O = 960.2, H = 988.6, L = 959.85, C = 988.5.
A bearish marubuzo indicates that there is so much selling pressure in the stock
the prior trend has been, the action on the marubuzo day suggests that the
The sell price should be around the closing price of the marubuzo.
Trade can be initiated based on the risk appetite of the person. The risk taker can
If the trader is risk averse, he can wait till the next day’s closing. The short trade will
This is also to ensure that we comply with 1st rule – Buy strength, and Sell weakness.
In the BPCL chart above, both risk taker and risk averse would have been profitable.
profitable for both risk taker, and a risk averse trader. Remember these are short
out for the risk taker but a risk averse trader would have entirely avoided initiating
2. Marubuzo is the only pattern which violates rule number 3 i.e Look for prior trend
1. Buy around the closing price of a bullish marubozu
1. Sell around the closing price of a bearish marubozu
6. Risk averse traders can place the trade on the next day after ensuring that it obeys
rule number 1 i.e Buy strength, and Sell weakness
markets. However when you see the spinning top with respect to the trend in the
6.2 – Spinning tops in a downtrend
What if the spinning tops were to occur when the stock is in a down trend?
In a down trend, the bears are in absolute control as they manage to grind the
prices lower. With the spinning top in the down trend the bears could be
consolidating their position before resuming another bout of selling. Also, the bulls
trend. The stance depends on what we expect going forward. Clearly there are two
1. Either there will be another round of selling
with only half the quantity. If the trader wants to buy 500 shares, he could probably
average up by buying again. If the prices reverse; most likely the trader would have
Here is a chart, which shows the downtrend followed by a set of spinning tops. The
Here is another chart which shows the continuation of a down trend after the
in the form of a continuation or a reversal of the trend. In which way the price will
6.2 – Spinning tops in an uptrend
A spinning top in an uptrend has similar implications as the spinning top in a down
trend, except that we look at it slightly differently. Look at the chart below, what can
An obvious observation is the fact that there is an uptrend in the market, which
2. Placing the above fact in the context of an uptrend we can conclude two things..
profits on the balance 50% as well. Your net selling price will anyway be higher than
Here is a chart which shows an uptrend and after the occurrence of spinning tops,
Have a look at the chart below, where the dojis appear in a downtrend indicating
Here is another chart where the doji appears after a healthy up trend after which
pause before they can resume the uptrend further or the bears are preparing to
break the trend. In either case, the trader’s stance has to be cautious. If the trader’s
intent is to buy, he is better off buying only half the quantity and he should wait for
a pause before they can resume the down trend further or the bulls are preparing
to break the trend and take the markets higher. Either case, the trader’s stance has
to be cautious. If the traders intent is to buy, he is better off buying only half the
A paper umbrella consists of two trend reversal patterns namely the hanging man
If the paper umbrella appears at the top end of an uptrend rally, it is called
the trend. A hammer consists of a small real body at the upper end of the trading
The prior trend for the hammer should be a down trend. The prior trend is
1. The market is in a down trend, where the bears are in absolute control of the
2. During a downtrend, every day the market would open lower compared to the
4. However at the low point, there is some amount of buying interest that emerges,
hence one should look at buying opportunities
2. The trader’s entry time depends on the risk appetite of the trader. If the trader is a
risk taker, he can buy the stock the same day. Remember, the color of the real body
risk averse, he can buy the stock the day after the pattern has formed only after
1. Risk takers can qualify the day as a hammer by checking the following condition at
3. If both these conditions are met, then the pattern is a hammer and the risk taker
2. The risk averse trader should evaluate the OHLC data on the 2nd If it’s a blue candle,
The chart below shows the formation of a hammer where both the risk taker and
the risk averse would have set up a profitable trade. This is a 15 minutes intraday
Buy Price for a risk taker – He takes the trade on the Hammer candle itself at –
Buy price for a risk averse – He takes the trade on the next candle after evaluating
Here is another chart where the risk averse trader would have benefited by virtue of
the ‘Buy strength and Sell weakness’ rule.
1. Prior trend to be a down trend
On the first hammer, the risk averse trader would have saved himself from a loss
have enticed both the risk averse and risk taker to enter a trade. After initiating the
Please note once you initiate the trade you stay in it until either the stop loss or the
calculated risk and not a mere speculative risk.
the prior trend condition and hence it is not defined pattern.
If a paper umbrella appears at the top end of a trend, it is called a Hanging man. The
is preceded by an uptrend.   Since the hanging man is seen after a high, the
bearish hanging man pattern signals selling pressure.
qualifies ‘the shadow to real body’ ratio. The prior trend for the hanging man should
be an uptrend, as highlighted by the curved line in the chart above. The thought
1. The market is in an uptrend, hence the bulls are in absolute control
1. For the risk taker, a short trade can be initiated the same day around the closing
2. For the risk averse, a short trade can be initiated at the close of the next day after
1. The method to validate the candle for the risk averse, and risk taker is exactly the
o The risk taker, initiates the short trade on the day the pattern appears (at 593)
o The risk averse, initiates the short trade on the next day at closing prices after
o Both the risk taker and the risk averse would have initiated their respective trades
The trade would have been profitable for both the risk types.
according to me re establishes the bull’s supremacy in the market.
pattern; hence the prior trend should be bullish.
o The stock is in an uptrend implying that the bulls are in absolute control. When bulls
o However at the high point of the day, there is a selling pressure to an extent where
o The selling indicates that the bears have made an entry, and they were actually
o The expectation is that the bears will continue selling over the next few trading
1. The risk taker will initiate the trade at 1417, basically on the same day the shooting
1. The risk taker initiates the trade the same day after ensuring that the day has
2. The risk averse will initiate the trade on the next day, only after ensuring that the
pattern. In the case the stop loss is at 1453
Here is a chart where both the risk taker and the risk averse would have made a
remarkable profit on a trade based on shooting star.
Here is an example, where both the risk averse and the risk taker would have
breached. Do remember, when the stop loss triggers, the trader will have to exit the
3. If a paper umbrella appears at the bottom of a down trend, it is called the ‘hammer’
4. If the paper umbrella appears at the top end of an uptrend, it is called the hanging
5. The hammer is a bullish pattern and one should look at buying opportunities when
6. The low of the hammer acts as the stop loss price trade
7. The hanging man is a bearish pattern which appears at the top end of the trend,
one should look at selling opportunities when it appears
8. The high of the hanging man acts as the stop loss price for the trade
9. The shooting star is a bearish pattern which appears at the top end of the trend.
10. The high of the shooting star will be the stop loss price for the trade.
at the bottom of the trend, it is called the “Bullish Engulfing” pattern. If the engulfing
pattern appears at the top end of the trend, it is called the “Bearish Engulfing”
bottom of the down trend. As the name suggests, this is a bullish pattern which
1. The prior trend should be a downtrend
1. The market is in down trend with prices steadily moving down
sudden buying interest, which drives the prices to close higher than the previous
attempt to break the bearish trend and they did so quite successfully. This is evident
sessions, driving the prices higher and hence the trader should look for buying
2. The suggested buy price is around the close price of blue candle i.e on P2
o Risk taker initiates the trade on P2 itself after ensuring P2 is engulfing P1
o The risk averse initiates the trade on the next day i.e the day after P2 around the
o If the day after P2 is a red candle day, the risk averse trader will ignore the trade,
owing to rule 1 of candlesticks (Buy strength and Sell weakness)
or more days it is worth to be a risk taker as opposed to a risk averse trader
3. The stop loss for the trade would be at the lowest low between P1, and P2
trail the stop loss to lock in profits.
1. The risk taker would go long on P2 at 169. He can do this by validating P2 as an
2. The risk averse will initiate the trade, the day after P2 only after ensuring that the
day is a blue candle day. So if the P1 falls on a Monday, the risk averse would be
3. The stop loss on this trade will be the lowest low between P1 and P2. In this
In this example, both the risk averse and the risk taker would have been profitable.
risk averse trader would have completely missed out a great trading opportunity.
end of the trend, thus making it a bearish pattern. The thought process remains
However at this high point selling pressure starts. This selling comes unexpected
4. The sellers push the prices lower, so much so that the stock closes below the
5. The strong sell on P2 indicates that the bears may have successfully broken down
the bull’s stronghold and the market may continue to witness selling pressure over
2. The risk taker initiates the trade on the same day after validating two conditions
3. The risk averse will initiate the trade on the day after P2 only after ensuring that the
4. Since the bearish engulfing pattern is a 2 day pattern, it makes sense to be a risk
taker. However this purely depends on the individual’s risk appetite
work in favor of a risk taker. However the risk averse would have completely
profitable for both the risk taker and the risk averse.
1. On P2 by 3:20 PM the risk taker would initiate the short trade at 209 after ensuring
2. The risk averse will initiate the trade, the day after P2 only after ensuring that the
Both the risk averse and the risk taker would have been profitable in this particular
1. An obvious uptrend as highlighted
1. A prolonged uptrend in the chart confirms the bulls are in absolute control
the high point a strong surge to sell builds up, to an extent that the prices closes
engulfing including the trade set up. Here a risk taker would initiate the trade on P2
around the close. The risk averse would initiate the trade, the day after P2 only after
bottom end of downtrend. Day one is called P1 and day 2 is called P2
4. A risk taker initiates a long trade at the close of P2 after ensuring P1 and P2 together
form a bullish engulfing pattern. A risk averse trader will initiate the trade the day
6. The bearish engulfing pattern appears at the top end of an uptrend. P1’s blue
7. A risk taker initiates a short trade at the close of P2 after ensuring P1 and P2
together form a bearish engulfing pattern. The risk averse trader will initiate the
first candle. On the appearance of the harami pattern a trend reversal is possible.
1. The market is in a downtrend pushing the prices lower, therefore giving the bears
2. Risk takers can initiate a long trade around the close of the P2 candle
3. Risk takers can validate the following conditions to confirm if P1, and P2 together
4. The risk averse can initiate a long trade at the close of the day after P2, only after
The risk taker would initiate the long position at the close of P2 which is around 835.
The stop loss for the trade would be lowest low price between P1 and P2; which in
The risk averse will initiate the trade the day near the close of the day after P2,
be hit or the stop loss to be triggered.
but it is not. The prior trend should be bearish, but in this case the prior trend is
The bearish harami pattern appears at the top end of an uptrend which gives the
1. The market is in an uptrend, placing the bulls in absolute control
1. The risk taker will short the market near the close of P2 after ensuring P1 and P2
2. The risk averse will short the market the day after P2 after ensuring it forms a red
The risk taker will initiate the trade on day 2, near the closing price of 125. The risk
candle day. In the above example, the risk averse would have avoided the trade
The stop loss for the trade would be the highest high between P1 and P2. In this
3. A bullish harami candle pattern is formed at the lower end of a down trend. P1 is a
near the close of P2 (risk taker). A risk averse trader will initiate the long trade near
4. The stop loss on a bullish harami pattern is the lowest low price between P1 and P2
5. The bearish harami pattern is formed at the top end of an uptrend. P1 is a long blue
close of P2 (risk taker). The risk averse will initiate the short near the close of the day
6. The stop loss on a bearish harami pattern is the highest high price between P1 and
Gap up opening – A gap up opening indicates buyer’s enthusiasm. Buyers are
willing to buy stocks at a price higher than the previous day’s close. Hence, because
of enthusiastic buyer’s outlook, the stock (or the index) opens directly above the
quarterly results. The numbers are so good that on Tuesday morning the buyers are
willing to buy the stock at any price. This enthusiasm would lead to stock price
enthusiasm of the bears. The bears are so eager to sell, that they are willing to sell
quarterly results were bad, the sellers would want to get rid of the stock and hence
period. It is a downtrend reversal pattern. The pattern is formed by combining 3
trend. In the chart below the morning star is encircled.
1. Market is in a downtrend placing the bears in absolute control. Market makes
long red candle. The large red candle shows selling acceleration
have been a bit jittery. Encouraged by the gap up opening buying persists through
trading sessions and hence one should look at buying opportunities in the market
Unlike the single and two candlestick patterns, both the risk taker and the risk
3. The lowest low in the pattern would act as a stop loss for the trade
appears at the top end of an uptrend. Like the morning star, the evening star is a
1. The market is in an uptrend placing the bulls in absolute control
2. During an uptrend the market/stock makes new highs
day 1 (P1) shows buying acceleration
red candle. The long red candle indicates that the sellers are taking control. The
3. Both risk taker and risk averse can initiate the trade on P3
4. The stop loss for the trade will be the highest high of P1, P2, and P3.
Before we conclude this chapter let us summarize the entry and stop loss for both
Risk taker – The risk taker enters the trade on the last day of the pattern formation
Risk averse – The risk averse trader will initiate the trade after he identifies a
3. Morning star is a bullish pattern which occurs at the bottom end of the trend. The
idea is to go long on P3 with the lowest low of the pattern being the stop loss for the
4. Evening star is a bearish pattern, which occurs at the top end of an up trend. The
idea is to go short on P3, with the highest high of the pattern acting as a stop loss
5. The star formation evolves over a 3 days period, hence both the risk averse and risk
The best way to identify the target price is to identify the support and the resistance
points. The support and resistance (S&R) are specific price points on a chart which
are expected to attract maximum amount of either buying or selling. The support
price is a price at which one can expect more buyers than sellers. Likewise the
resistance price is a price at which one can expect more sellers than buyers.
As the name suggests, resistance is something which stops the price from rising
further. The resistance level is a price point on the chart where traders expect
maximum supply (in terms of selling) for the stock/index. The resistance level is
The likely hood of the price rising up to the resistance level, consolidating, absorbing
all the supply, and then declining is high. The resistance is one of the critical
resistance often acts as a trigger to sell.
Rs.215 on chart, marks the resistance level for Ambuja Cements.
1. The resistance level, indicated by a horizontal line, is higher than the current market
2. While the resistance level is at 215, the current candle is at 206.75. The current
resistance, we now know that we can set 215 as a possible target for this trade!
1. Resistance of 215 implies there is a likelihood of excess supply
2. Excess supply builds selling pressure
3. Selling pressure tends to drag the prices lower
Hence for reasons stated above, when a trader is long he can look at resistance
Also, with the identification of the resistance the long trade can now be completely
The next obvious question is how do we identify the resistance level? Identifying
price points as either a support or resistance is extremely simple. The identification
process is the same for both support and resistance. If the current market price is
below the identified point, it is called a resistance point; else it is called a support
Since the process is the same, let us proceed to understand ‘support’, and we will
Having learnt about resistance, understanding the support level should be quite
simple and intuitive. As the name suggests, the support is something that prevents
the price from falling further. The support level is a price point on the chart where
the trader expects maximum demand (in terms of buying) coming into the
stock/index. Whenever the price falls to the support line, it is likely to bounce back.
The support level is always below the current market price.
There is a maximum likely hood that the price could fall till the support, consolidate,
absorb all the demand, and then start to move upwards. The support is one of the
critical technical level market participants look for in a falling market. The support
often acts as a trigger to buy.
marks the support level for Cipla.
1. The support level, indicated by the horizontal line is below the current market price
2. While the support level is at 435, the current candle is at 442.5. The current candle
Like we did while understanding resistance, let us imagine a bearish pattern
know 435 the immediate support, we can set the target at 435.
1. Support at 435 implies there is a maximum likely hood of excess demand to emerge
2. Excess demand builds buying pressure
3. Buying pressure tends to drag the price higher
Hence for the reasons stated above, when a trader is short, he can look at support
Also, with the identification of the support, the short trade is now completely
11.3 – Construction/Drawing of the Support and Resistance level
support and the resistance line.
price, it either becomes a support or resistance.
making 429 as an immediate support price for Cipla.
identifying S&R, you run the risk of approximation. Hence always give room for
is actually a zone or an area that acts as support or resistance.
to 432 as a support region for Cipla. There is no specific rule for this range, I just
subtracted and added 3 points to 429 to get my price range for support!
The current price of Ambuja is 204.1, the support is identified at 201 (below current
market price), and the resistance at 214 (above current market price). So if one were
to short Ambuja at 204, the target, based on support can be at 201. Probably this
reasonable target expectation based on resistance.
Notice in both the support and the resistance level, there at least 3 price action zone
The support and resistance lines are only indicative of a possible reversal of prices.
face a resistance at 214. Meaning, at 214 sellers could emerge who can potentially
drag the prices lower. What is the guarantee that the sellers would come in at 214?
In other words, what is dependence of the resistance line? Honestly, your guess is
that support and resistance levels will be reasonably honored.
support? Do you see a remarkable confluence of two technical theories here?
2. A support near the stoploss price suggests the trader the presence of significant
buying interest around the low
conditions (marubuzo + support near the low) suggests the same action i.e to
1. For a long trade, the low of the pattern should be around the support
2. For a short trade, the high of the pattern should be around the resistance
2. Support is a price point below the current market price that indicate buying interest
3. Resistance is a price point above the current market price that indicate selling
immediate resistance level as target. For a short trade, look for the immediate
Volume plays a very integral role in technical analysis as it helps us to confirm
trends and patterns. Consider volumes as means to gain insights into how other
Volumes indicate how many shares are bought and sold over a given period of time.
The more active the share, higher would be its volume. For example, you decide to
buy 100 shares of Amara Raja Batteries at 485, and I decide to sell 100 shares of
trade. You and I together have created a volume of 100 shares. Many people tend to
assume volume count as 200 (100 buy + 100 sell) which is not the right way to look
The following fictional example should help you understand how volumes add up
Sl No Time Buy Quantity Sell Quantity Price Volume Cumulative Volume
volume for the day, it would be 900 (400 + 500). Likewise 350 shares at 63.10 were
traded at 11:30 AM, and upto 11:30 AM, the volume was 1,250 (400+500+350). So
Here is a screen shot from the live market highlighting the volumes for some of the
If you notice, the volume on Cummins India Limited is 12,72,737 shares, likewise the
volume on Naukri (Info Edge India Limited) is 85,427 shares.
The volume information that you see here is the cumulative volume. Meaning, at
With 35 minutes left for the markets to close, it is only logical to expect the volumes
stocks with volume highlighted.
As you can see, the volume for Cummins India Limited has increased from 12,72,737
to 13,49,736. Therefore, for Cummins India the volume for the day is 13,49,736
shares. The volume for Naukri has increased from 85,427 to 86,712, making 86,712
shares as the volume for the day. It is important for you to note that the volumes
Volume information on its own is quite useless. For example, we know that the
volumes on Cummins India is 13,49,736 shares. So how useful is this information
actually mean nothing. However when you associate today’s volume information
with the preceding price and volume trend, then volume information becomes lot
In the table below you will find a summary of how to use volume information:
Sl No Price Volume What is the expectation?
02 Increases Decreases Caution – weak hands buying
04 Decreases Decreases Caution – weak hands selling
increase in volume, the expectation is bullish.
about an ‘increase in volume’. What does this actually mean? What is the reference
point?  Should it be an increase over the previous day’s volume number or the
previous week’s aggregate volume?
As a practice, traders usually compare today’s volume over the average of the last
10 days volume. Generally the rule of thumb is as follows:
High Volume = Today’s volume > last 10 days average volume
Low Volume = Today’s volume < last 10 days average volume
Average Volume = Today’s volume = last 10 days average volume
the volume bars and the job is done. Of course, we will discuss moving averages in
In the chart above, you can see that volumes are represented by blue bars (at the
bottom of the chart). The red line overlaid on the volume bars indicates the 10 day
average. As you notice, all the volume bars that are over and above the 10 day
average can be considered as increased volume where some institutional activity (or
Keeping this in perspective, I would suggest you now look at the volume – price
12.2 – Thought process behind the volume trend table
When institutional investors buy or sell they obviously do not transact in small
institutional investors in India. If they would buy shares of Cummins India, would
you think they would buy 500 shares? Obviously not, they would probably buy
500,000 shares or even more. Now, if they were to buy 500,000 shares from the
open market, it will start reflecting in volumes. Besides, because they are buying a
If both the price and the volume are increasing this only means one thing – a big
look at buying opportunity in the stock.
Or as a corollary, whenever you decide to buy, ensure that the volumes are
substantial. This means that you are buying along with the smart money.
This is exactly what the 1st row in the volume trend table indicates – expectation
turns bullish when both the price and volume increases.
What do you think happens when the price increases but the volume decreases as
1. Because market participants are buying
2. Are there any institutional buyers associated with the price increase?
1. Simple, if they were buying then the volumes would have increased and not
4. So what does an increase in price, associated by decreasing volumes indicate?
influential buying. Hence you need to be cautious as this could be a possible bull
volume sets a bearish expectation. Why do you think so?
A decrease in price indicates that market participants are selling the stock. Increase
in volumes indicates the presence of smart money. Both events occurring together
(decrease in price + increase in volumes) should imply that smart money is selling
the expectation is bearish and hence one should look at selling opportunity in the
Or as a corollary, whenever you decide to sell, ensure that the volumes are good.
This means that you too are selling, along with the smart money.
Moving forward, what do you think happens when both volume and price decrease
1. Because market participants are selling.
2. Are there any institutional sellers associated with the price decrease?
3. How would you know that there are no meaningful sell orders by institutional
1. Simple, if they were selling then the volume would increase and not decrease
4. So how would you infer a decline in price and a decline in volume?
influential (read as smart money) selling. Hence you need to be cautions as this
Let us revisit the checklist and revaluate from the volumes perspective. Imagine this
2. A support level around the low of bullish engulfing – support indicates demand.
Therefore the occurrence of a bullish engulfing pattern near the support area
suggests there is indeed a strong demand for the stock and hence the trader can
1. With a recognizable candlestick pattern and support near the stoploss, the trader
Now along with support near the low, imagine high volumes on the 2nd day of the
The inference is quite clear – high volumes plus increase in price confirms to us that
large influential market participants are positioning themselves to buy the stock.
With all three independent variables i.e candlesticks, S&R, and volumes suggest to
The point that I want to drive across is the fact that volumes are very powerful as it
1. For a long trade, the low of the pattern should be around the support
2. For a short trade, the high of the pattern should be around the resistance
3. Volumes should confirm to the trade
1. Presence of above average volumes on both buy and sell day
2. Low volumes are not encouraging and hence do feel free to hesitate taking a trade
1. Volumes are used to confirm a trend
2. 100 share buy and 100 shares sell makes the total volume 100, not 200
3. The end of day volumes indicates the cumulative volume across trades executed
4. High volumes indicates the presence of smart money
5. Low volumes indicate retail participation
6. When you initiate a trade to either go long or short always make sure if volumes
7. Avoid trading on low volume days
that. Moving averages are trend indicators and are frequently used due to their
Moving Average (EMA). I deliberately skipped the EMA calculation part, simply
because most of the technical analysis software lets us drag and drop the EMA on
prices. Hence we will focus on EMA’s application as opposed to its calculation.
Here is a chart of Cipla Ltd. I have plotted a 50 day SMA (black) and a 50 day EMA
(red) on Cipla’s closing prices. Though both SMA and EMA are for a 50 day period,
you can notice that the EMA is more reactive to the prices and hence it sticks closer
The reason why EMA is quicker to react to the current market price is because EMA
quicker trading decisions. Hence for this reason, traders prefer the use of the EMA
The moving average can be used to identify buying and selling opportunities with its
are willing to buy the stock at a price higher than its average price. This means the
are willing to sell the stock at a price lesser than its average price. This means the
Rule 1) Buy (go long) when the current market price turns greater than the 50 day
EMA. Once you go long, you should stay invested till the necessary sell condition is
Starting from left, the first opportunity to buy originated at 165, highlighted on the
its 50 day EMA. Hence as per the trading system rule, we initiate a fresh long
Sl No Buy Price Sell Price Gain/Loss % Return
evident that during the 1st and the 3rd trade, the stock was trending but during the
averages works brilliantly when there is a trend and fails to perform when the stock
1. Moving averages gives you many trading signals (buy and sell) during a sideways
6. The profit making trade ensures you are in the trend as long as the trend lasts.
A typical example of this would be to combine a 50 day EMA, with a 100 day EMA.
As you can see, the black 50 day EMA line is closer to the current market price (as it
reacts faster) when compared to the pink 100 day EMA (as its reacts slower).
Rule 1) – Buy (fresh long) when the short term moving averages turns greater than
1. 9 day EMA with 21 day EMA – use this for short term trades ( upto few trading
2. 25 day EMA with 50 day EMA – use this to identify medium term trade (upto few
3. 50 day EMA with 100 Day EMA – use this to identify trades that lasts upto few
4. 100 day EMA with 200 day EMA – use this to identify long term trades (investment
Here is an example of a 25 x 50 EMA crossover. There are three trading signals that
You may have heard this popular saying in the markets – “The trend is you friend”.
Remember, MA is a trend following system – as long as there is a trend, the moving
4. An exponential moving average (EMA) scales the data according to its newness.
5. For all practical purposes, use an EMA as opposed to SMA. This is because the EMA
6. The outlook is bullish when the current market price is greater than the EMA. The
outlook turns bearish when the current market price turns lesser than the EMA
7. In a non trending market, moving averages may result in whipsaws thereby causing
frequent losses. To overcome this a EMA crossover system is adopted
8. In a typical crossover system, the price chart is over laid with two EMAs. The shorter
EMA is faster to react, while the longer EMA is slower to react
9. The outlook turns bullish when the faster EMA crosses and is above the slower EMA.
Hence one should look at buying the stock. The trade lasts upto a point where the
faster EMA starts going below the slower EMA
their technical study (candlesticks, volumes, S&R) to arrive at a trading decision.
Indicators help in buying, selling, confirming trends, and sometimes predicting
the price, meaning it usually signals the occurrence of a reversal or a new trend in
occurrence of a reversal or a new trend after it has occurred.  You may think, what
indicators such as RSI, MACD, Stochastic etc. Hence, for this reason we discussed
good idea to understand what momentum means. Momentum is the rate at which
the next day, and Rs.115, the day after, we say the momentum is high as the stock
happened over let us say 3 months, we can conclude the momentum is low. So the
more rapidly the price changes, the higher the momentum.
Relative strength Index or just RSI, is a very popular indicator developed by J.Welles
Wilder. RSI is a leading momentum indicator which helps in identifying a trend
reversal. RSI indicator oscillates between 0 and 100, and based on the latest
security. RSI is the most popular leading indicator, which gives out strongest signals
during the periods of sideways and non trending ranges.
The formula to calculate the RSI is as follows:
The first step is to calculate ‘RS’ also called the RSI factor. RS as you can see in the
Plugging in the value of RS in RSI formula,
As you can see RSI calculation is fairly simple. The objective of using RSI is to help
the positive momentum in the stock is so high that it may not be sustainable for
that the negative momentum is high leading to a possible reversal.
To begin with, the red line below the price chart indicates the 14 period RSI. If you
notice the RSI’s scale you will realize its upper bound to 100, and lower bound to 0.
When the RSI reading is between 30 and 0, the security is supposed to be oversold
The first vertical line marked from left shows a level where RSI is below 30, in fact
RSI is 26.8. Hence RSI suggests that the stock is oversold. In this particular example,
the RSI value of 26.8, also coincides with a bullish engulfing pattern. This gives the
trader a double confirmation to go long! Needless to say, both volumes and S&R
The second vertical line, points to a level where the RSI turns 81, a value which is
trader should be careful in his decision to buy the stock. Again, if you notice the
backed by an RSI of 81 is a sign to short the stock. What follows this is a quick and a
pattern and RSI perfectly align to confirm the occurrence of the same event. This
may not always be true. This leads us to another interesting way to interpret RSI.
Scenario 1) A stock which is in a continuous uptrend (remember the uptrend can
last from few days to few years) the RSI will remain stuck in the overbought region
for a long time, and this is because the RSI is upper bound to 100. It cannot go
Scenario 2) A stock which is in a continuous downtrend the RSI will be stuck in the
oversold region since the RSI is lower bound to 0. It cannot go beyond 0. In this case
as well the trader will be looking at buying opportunities but the stock will be going
This leads us to interpret RSI in many different ways besides the classical
1. If the RSI is fixed in an overbought region for a prolonged period, look for buying
opportunities instead of shorting. The RSI stays in the overbought region for a
prolonged period because of an excess positive momentum
2. If the RSI is fixed in an oversold region for a prolonged period, look for selling
opportunities rather than buying. RSI stays in the oversold region for a prolonged
period because of an excess negative momentum
3. If the RSI value starts moving away from the oversold value after a prolonged
period, look for buying opportunities. For example, the RSI moves above 30 after a
4. If the RSI value starts moving away from the overbought value after a prolonged
period, look for selling opportunities. For example, RSI moving below 70 after a long
None of the parameters used while analyzing RSI should be treated with rigidity. For
1978 (which is when RSI was introduced to the world). You may choose to use
the same. Please note, fewer the days you use to calculate the RSI, the more volatile
Finally, do remember RSI is not used often as a standalone indicator by  traders, it is
of an event. Lagging indicators on the other hand confirms an ongoing trend
3. RSI is a momentum oscillator which oscillates between 0 and 100 level
6. If the RSI value is fixed in a region for a prolonged period, it indicates excess
momentum and hence instead of taking a reversed position, the trader can consider
15.1 Moving Average Convergence and Divergence (MACD)
The Moving Average Convergence and Divergence (MACD) indicator was developed
by Gerald Appel in the late seventies. Traders consider MACD as the grand old
daddy of indicators. Though invented in the seventies, MACD is still considered as
one of the most reliable indicators by momentum traders.
As the name suggests, MACD is all about the convergence and divergence of the two
A standard MACD is calculated using a 12 day EMA and a 26 day EMA. Please note,
both the EMA’s are based on the closing prices.We subtract the 26 EMA from the 12
day EMA, to estimate the convergence and divergence (CD) value. A simple line
graph of this is often referred to as the ‘MACD Line’.  Let us go through the math
first and then figure out the applications of MACD.
Date Close 12 Day EMA 26 Day EMA MACD Line
3. We leave the first 12 data points (closing price of Nifty) to calculate the 12 day EMA
4. We then leave the first 26 data points to calculate the 26 day EMA
5. Once we have both 12 and 26 day EMA running parallel to each other (6th Feb 2014)
6. MACD value = [12 day EMA – 26 day EMA]. For example on 6th Feb 2014, 12 day EMA
was 6153, and 26 day EMA was 6198, hence the MACD would be 6153-6198 = – 45
When we calculate the MACD value over a series of 12 and 26 day EMAs and plot it
as a line graph, we get the MACD line, which oscillates above and below the central
Date Close 12 Day EMA 26 Day EMA MACD Line
Given the MACD value, lets try and find the answer for few obvious questions:
1. What does a negative MACD value indicate?
2. What does a positive MACD value indicate?
3. What does the magnitude of the MACD value actually mean? As in, what information
does a -90 MACD  convey versus a – 30 MACD ?
The sign associated with the MACD just indicates the direction of the stock’s move.
For example if the 12 Day EMA is 6380, and 26 Day EMA is 6220 then the MACD
value is +160. Now, under what circumstance do you think the 12 day EMA will be
greater than the 26 day EMA? Well, we had looked into this in the moving average
when the stock price is trending upwards. Also, do remember, the shorter term
term average. Hence a positive sign tells us that there is positive momentum in the
stock, and the stock is drifting upwards. The higher the momentum, the higher is
the magnitude. For example, +160 indicate a positive trend which is stronger than
Nifty, naturally, the higher will be the magnitude of the MACD.
When the MACD is negative, it means the 12 day EMA is lower than the 26 day EMA.
Therefore the momentum is negative. Higher the magnitude of the MACD, the more
strength in the downward trend.
The difference between the two moving averages is called the MACD spread. The
spread decreases when the momentum mellows down and increases when the
momentum increases. To visualize convergence and the divergence traders usually
plot the chart of the MACD value, often referred to as the MACD line.
The following is the MACD line chart of Nifty for data points starting from 1st Jan
As you can see the MACD line oscillates over a central zero line. This is also called
the ‘Center line’. The basic interpretation of the MACD indicator is that:
1. When the MACD Line crosses the center line from the negative territory to positive
increasing bullish momentum; therefore one should look at buying opportunities.
2. When the MACD line crosses the center line from positive territory to the negative
increasing bearish momentum; therefore one should look at selling opportunities.
As you can see, there were two instance during which the MACD almost turned
negative (8th May, and 24th July) but the MACD just stopped at the zero line and
Traders generally argue that while waiting for the MACD line to crossover the center
a trade.  To overcome this, there is an improvisation over this basic MACD line. The
improvisation comes in the form of an additional MACD component which is the 9
day signal line. A 9 day signal line is a exponential moving average (EMA) of the
MACD line. If you think about this, we now have two lines:
2. A 9 day EMA of the MACD line, also called the signal line
1. The sentiment is bullish when the  MACD line crosses the 9 day EMA wherein MACD
line is greater than the 9 day EMA. When this happens, the trader should look at
2. The sentiment is bearish when the MACD line crosses below the 9 day EMA wherein
the MACD line is lesser than the 9 day EMA. When this happens, the trader should
The chart below plots the MACD indicator on Asian Paints Limited. You can see the
MACD indicator below the price chart.
The indicator uses standard parameters of MACD:
1. 12 day EMA of closing prices
2. 26 day EMA of closing prices
3. MACD line (12D EMA – 26D EMA) represented by the black line
4. 9 day EMA of the MACD line represented by the red line
signal to either buy or sell has originated.
MACD line lies below the signal line (9 day EMA) lies and suggests a short trade.
The 2nd vertical line from left, points to a crossover where the MACD line lies above
the signal line, hence one should look at buying opportunity. So on and so forth.
Please note, at the core of the MACD system, are moving averages. Hence the MACD
quite well when there is a strong trend and are not too useful when the markets are
Needless to say, the MACD parameters are not set in stone. One is free to change
the 12 day, and 26 day EMA to whatever time frame one prefers. I personally like to
use the MACD in its original form, as introduced by Gerald Appel.
overbought and oversold levels, where a trader will try to sell when the price
reaches the top of the band and will execute a buy when the price reaches the
Therefore the trade would be to sell at 7950, with a target of 7800.
respect to the average prices, and hence one should look at buying opportunities
Therefore the trade would be to buy at 7650, with a target of 7800.
I have highlighted using a down arrow all the sell signals BB generated, while most
whenever the price drifts in a particular direction indicating a strong momentum.
important conclusion; BB works well in sideways markets, and fails in a trending
behind the trader’s decision to buy or sell. It is time to revisit that checklist.
a buy or a sell order. While the dependence on indicators is not as much S&R,
volumes or candlestick patterns, it is always good to know what the basic indicators
1. For a long trade, the low of the pattern should be around the support
2. For a short trade, the high of the pattern should be around the resistance
1. Ensure above average volumes on both buy and sell day
2. Low volumes are not encouraging, hence do feel free to hesitate while taking trade
Now, hypothetically imagine a situation where you are looking at opportunity to buy
2. The low of the bullish hammer also coincides with the support
3. The volumes are above average
4. There is also an MACD crossover (signal line turns greater than the MACD line)
With all four checklist points being ticked off I would be very glad to buy Karnataka
Bank. Hence I place an order to buy, let us say for 500 shares.
I would still go ahead and buy, but instead of 500 shares, I’d probably buy 300
still go ahead with my decision to buy, but I scale down my bet size.
low of the bullish hammer does not coincide in and around the support, then I’ll
really reconsider my plan to buy the stock; in fact I may skip the opportunity, and
1. A MACD is a trend following system
2. MACD consists of a 12 Day, 26 day EMA
3. MACD line is 12d EMA – 26d EMA
4. Signal line is the 9 day SMA of the MACD line
5. A crossover strategy can be applied between MACD Line, and the signal line
9. BB works well in a sideways market. In a trending market the BB’s envelope
ancient Indian mathematic scripts, with some claims dating back to 200 BC.
However, in the 12th century, Leonardo Pisano Bogollo an Italian mathematician
into the ratio properties, one can find remarkable consistency when a number is in
opportunity for the traders to enter new positions in the direction of the trend.  The
the trend. To use the Fibonacci retracements we should first identify the 100%
Think of a situation where you wanted to buy a particular stock but you have not
I would buy a stock only after it has passed the other checklist items. In other words
my conviction to buy would be higher if the stock has:
in for a strong buy. The usage of the word ‘strong’ just indicates the level of
trend and reversal, more robust is the signal. The same logic can also be applied for
2. A Fibonacci series has many mathematical properties. These mathematical
the time of Charles Dow, and hence there are supporters and critics of the Dow
market trends Primary Trend, Secondary Trend, and Minor Trends
This is the major trend of the market that lasts from a year to
trend, an active trader is interested in all trends. The primary trend
could be a primary uptrend or a primary down trend
These are corrections to the primary trend. Think of this as a minor
market. The counter trend can last anywhere between a few
We cannot confirm a trend based on just one index. For example
The volumes must confirm along with price. The trend should be
supported by volume. In an uptrend the volume must increase as
the price rises and should reduce as the price falls. In a downtrend,
volume must increase when the price falls and decrease when the
price rises. You could refer chapter 12 for more details on volume
Markets may remain sideways (trading between a range) for an
be a substitute for a secondary trend
The Accumulation phase usually occurs right after a steep sell off in the market. The
steep sell off in the markets would have frustrated many market participants, losing
hope of any sort of uptrend in prices. The stock prices would have plummeted to
rock bottom valuations, but the buyers would still be hesitant of buying fearing
there could be another sell off. Hence the stock price languishes at low levels. This is
sell off. Institutional investors start to acquire shares regularly, in large quantities
This also means that the sellers who are trying to sell during the accumulation
phase will easily find buyers, and therefore the prices do not decline further. Hence
than not, this is how the support levels are created. Accumulation phase can last up
term traders sense the occurrence of a support. This usually coincides with
phase) will start offloading their shares slowly. The public will absorb all the volumes
needed price support. The distribution phase has similar price properties as that of
action repeats several times and thus the resistance level is created.
Finally when the institutional investors (smart money) completely sell off their
holdings, there would no further support for prices, and hence what follows after
the distribution phase is a complete sell off in the markets, also known as the mark
down of prices. The selloff in the market leaves the public in an utter state of
Completing the circle, what follows the selloff phase is a fresh round of
cycle from accumulation phase to the selloff spans over a few years.
The support and resistance is also a core concept for the Dow Theory, but because
of its importance (in terms of placing targets and stop loss) we have discussed it
buying opportunities. Here is a chart that shows a double bottom formation in Cipla
twice but eventually sells off. Of course the time gap between the two attempts of
Theory and candlestick perspective there is consensus to sell; hence the conviction
sell off after testing the price level for the 3rd time, thus completing the triple top.
the price oscillates in a narrow range without forming a particular trend, it is called a
sideways market or sideways drift. So, when both the buyers and sellers are not
resistance and the downside by the support. Thus it is known as a range bound
market or a trading market as there are enough opportunities for both the buyers
initiate in such a scenario would be to buy near the lower level, and sell near the
higher level and buying it back at the lower level.
Stocks do breakout of the range after being in the range for a long time. Before we
announcement. Till the announcement is made both buyers and sellers would be
The stock after being in the range can break out of the range. The range breakout
more often than not indicates the start of a new trend. The direction in which the
stock will breakout depends on the nature of the trigger or the outcome of the
event. What is more important is the breakout itself, and the trading opportunity it
A trader will take a long position when the stock price breaks the resistance levels
and will go short after the stock price breaks the support level.
This is how the breakout happens. However, the trader needs to be aware of the
concept of a ‘false breakout’.
A false breakout happens when the trigger is not strong enough to pull the stock in
a particular direction. Loosely put, a false breakout happens when a ‘not so trigger
volumes are low on false range breakouts indicating, there is no smart money
involved in the move. After a false breakout, the stock usually falls back within the
A true breakout has two distinct characteristics:
2. After the breakout, the momentum (rate of change of price) is high
The stock attempted to breakout of the range three times, however the first two
attempts were false breakouts. The first 1st breakout (starting from left) was
characterized by low volumes, and low momentum. The 2nd breakout was
characterized by impressive volumes but lacked momentum.
However the 3rd breakout had the classic breakout attributes i.e high volumes and
18.3 – Trading the range breakout
Traders buy the stock as soon as the stock breaks out of the range on good
volumes. Good volumes confirm just one of the prerequisite of the range breakout.
However, there is no way for the trader to figure out if the momentum (second
After initiating the trade, if the breakout is genuine then the trader can expect a
with the breakout at Rs.168, the minimum target expectation would be 43 points
For a trader who has missed the opportunity to buy the stock, the flag formation
offers a second chance to buy. However the trader has to be quick in taking the
by selling the stock. This leads to a decline in the stock price.  As only the retail
participants are selling, the volumes are on the lower side. The smart money is still
traders see this as an opportunity to buy the stock and hence the price rallies all of
18.5 – The Reward to Risk Ratio (RRR)
The concept of reward to risk ratio (RRR) is generic and not really specific to Dow
Theory. It would have been apt to discuss this under ‘trading systems and Risk
The calculation of the reward to risk ratio is very simple. Look at the details of this
What is the risk the trader is taking? –  [Entry – Stoploss] i.e 55.75 – 53.55 = 2.2
What is the reward the trader is expecting? – [Exit – Entry] i.e 57.2 – 55.75 = 1.45
This means for a reward of 1.45 points the  trader is risking 2.2 points or in other
words the Reward to Risk ratio is 1.45/2.2 = 0.65. Clearly this is not a great trade.
you risk on a trade your expected return should be at least Rs.1.3/- or higher,
otherwise it is simply not a worth the risk.
In this trade the trader is risking Rs.5/- (107 – 102) for an expected reward of Rs.7/-
(114 – 107). RRR in this case is 7/5 = 1.4. This means for every Rs.1/- of risk the
trader is assuming, he is expecting Rs.1.4 as reward. Not a bad deal.
The minimum RRR threshold should be set by each trader based on his/her risk
they risk they expect a reward of Rs.1. Some would prefer the RRR to be at least
every Rs.1/- of risk they would expect at least Rs.2 as reward.
attractive must be dropped as it is just not worth the risk.
formation. The volumes are very attractive as they are at least 30% more than the
10 day average volumes. Near the bearish engulfing patterns high the chart is
showing a medium term support.
Risk: 7.18 (772.85 – 765.67) i.e [Stoploss – Entry]
Reward: 7.17 (765.67 – 758.5) i.e [Entry – Exit]
1. For a long trade, the low of the pattern should be around the support
2. For a short trade, the high of the pattern should be around the resistance
1. Ensure above average volumes on both buy and sell day
2. Low volumes are not encouraging, and hence do feel free to hesitate while taking
trade where the volumes are low
1. Think about your risk appetite and identify your RRR threshold
based on candlesticks, then look at what the primary and secondary trend is
suggesting. If the primary trend is bullish, then it would be a good sign, however if
we are in the secondary trend (which is counter to the primary) then you may want
to think twice as the immediate trend is counter to the long trade.
discussed here. If we have not discussed a pattern or an indicator here on Varsity,
trading strategies, risk management, and trading psychology. All of which we will
2. A trader can buy at the lower price point, and sell at the higher price point
4. The stock can break out of the range. A good breakout is characterized by above
average volumes and sharp surge in prices
5. If the trader has missed an opportunity to buy a stock, the flag formation offers
From my experience buying the latest version of a good charting software
recurs annually. Do note, the older versions of the charting software may cost you
technical strategies and back test the same on historical data. Do note, on Varsity
transition period is remarkably lesser.
1. Alternatively you can have ‘minimum volume criteria’. For example you can consider
only those stocks where the volume per day is at least 500000
2. After this I look at the ‘prior trend’. For all bullish patterns, the prior trend should be
a downtrend, and for all bearish patterns the prior trend should be an uptrend. I do
pay a lot of attention to prior trends
with a well defined prior trend), I proceed to inspect the chart further
4. After this I look at the volumes. The volume should be at least equal to or more than
5. Provided both the candlestick pattern and volumes confirm, I then proceed to check
the existence of the support (in case of a long trade) and resistance (in case of a
formations, flags formations and the possibility of a range breakout
1. Needless to say, I also establish the Primary and secondary market trend
7. If the steps 1 to 5 are satisfactory, I proceed to calculate the risk to reward ratio
1. To calculate RRR, I first establish the target by plotting either the support or
8. At last I look at the MACD and RSI indicators to get a perspective, if they confirm and
Zerodha, the overall profitability would shrink remarkably if you are scalping with an
candlestick pattern and volume
3. A risk reward ratio of even 0.5 to 0.75 is acceptable while scalping
5. Have an effective risk management system – be really quick to book a loss if need
6. Keep a tab on the bid ask spread to see how the volumes are building
Index (ADX) measures trend strength without regard to trend direction. The other
complement ADX by defining trend direction. Used together, chartists can
determine both the direction and strength of the trend. Source: stockcharts.com
2. ADX is used to measure the strength/weakness of the trend and not the actual
3. ADX above 25 indicates that the present trend is strong, ADX below 20 suggest that
the trend lacks strength. ADX between 20 and 25 is a grey area
4. A buy signal is generated when ADX is 25 and the +DI crosses over –DI
5. A sell signal is generated when ADX is 25 and the –DI crosses over +DI
6. Once the buy or sell signal is generated, take the trade by defining the stop loss
7. The stop loss is usually the low of the signal candle (for buy signals) and the high of
An indicator designed to signal a trend absence, formation and direction. Bill
5. A buy signal is generated when the following condition is satisfied –
3. Once the above condition is satisfied, it means that the asset is trending up
4. When the uptrend is established, it is upto the trader to identify a good entry point
6. A sell signal is generated when the following condition is satisfied –
3. Once the above condition is satisfied, it means that the asset is trending down
4. When the downtrend is established, it is upto the trader to identify a good entry
chart. Do notice there are 2 instances when the sell condition is satisfied
(highlighted in red) and 1 instance when the buy condition is satisfied (highlighted in
whether a stock is trending or not and how strong the trend is. “Aroon” means
designed to reveal the beginning of a new trend. The Aroon indicators measure the
Aroon indicators are quite different from typical momentum oscillators, which focus
price. Chartists can use the Aroon indicators to spot emerging trends, identify
6. A buy is generated when Aroon up is above 50 and Aroon low is below 30
7. A sell is generated when Aroon down is above 50 and Aroon up is below 30
favor an uptrend when the indicator is positive and a downtrend when the indicator
the trend. For example, a surge above +50 would reflect a strong upside move,
5. ATR is used to identify stop loss as well
10. If these SL levels are outside your risk to reward appetite, the its best to avoid such
trending in a particular direction. In order to do this, the ATR band calculates the
Before understanding the supertrend indicator, understanding the ATR is necessary
as super trend employs ATR values to calculate the indicator values. The supertrend
underlying. Super trend does not predict the direction, rather once the direction is
position till the trend sustains.
1. When plotted, the supertrend indicator appears like a alternating green and red
2. A buy signal is generated when the stock/index price turns greater than the
4. A sell signal is generated when the stock/index price turns lesser than the indicator
5. The sell signal can be used to initiate a fresh short or exit long. Although waiting for
the sell signal to exit the existing long position can sometime lead to taking a loss.
7. Supertrend is basically used to identify a trend therefore it works best in a trending
8. The supertrend indicator when compared to a regular Moving Average trading
system generates fewer false signals, for this reason the super trend indicator is
When you select Supertrend indicator from the list of studies you will be prompted
Multiplier is a crucial input for Super trend. If the multiplier value is too high, then
buy/sell signal is generated green and red arrows are generated (respectively)
Volume weighted average price (VWAP)
averaging the traded price in terms of volume traded. Let me give you an example
2. Volume Price (VP) = we get this by multiplying the typical price with its volume
4. Total volume = This is again a cumulative number, which is got by adding the
current volume to the previous volume
5. VWAP = We get this VWAP number by dividing the Total VP by Total Volume. The
resulting number indicates the average traded price, weighted by volume.
sense, basic mathematics, and a bit of business sense is all that is required
To put his thoughts into action, he buys call options of State Bank of India.
To put his thoughts into action, he sells 5 lots of Nifty Call options and expects
However, Girish plans to buy more of his portfolio shares if the market overreacts to
attractive for an options seller. He is expecting the volatility to drop just prior to RBI
prepared to buy more of his portfolio stocks in case the market overreacts. His idea
1. Let Rs.20 in profits remain invested along with the original principal of Rs.100 or
5. Share transactions – Is the management buying/selling shares of the company
Does the business require constant political support?
talking about the macro trends in the economy. They discuss the overall economic
Following this the companies usually talk about the trends in the industry and what
trends). However going forward, the company would discuss various aspects related
would demand a further investigation.
company buys towards conducting its business. This stands at Rs.211 Crs. I will give
than it managed to sell. To give a sense of proportion (in terms of sales and costs of
sell these extra products sometime in future. This cost, which the company adds
provides an economic value to the company such as brand value, trademarks,
From the note it is quite clear that other expenses include manufacturing, selling,
Think about this way – if you buy a mobile phone on EMI (via a credit card) you
becomes your ‘current liability’. However if you buy an apartment by seeking a 15
owners on the assets of the company. It represents the assets that remain after
physical nature. This usually includes patents, copyrights, trademarks, designs etc.
perspective. This stands at Rs.16.07 Crs. The investment could be anything – buying
hand and cash on demand. Cash equivalents are short term, highly liquid
time the company needs to sell its products.
Assume a simple coffee shop selling coffee and short eats. All the sales the shop
and a snack, he needs to have enough money to buy what he wants. Going by that
on a particular day, assume the shop manages to sell Rs.2,500/- worth of coffee and
Now think about another business that sells laptops. For sake of simplicity, let us
assume that the shop sells only 1 type of laptop at a standard fixed rate of
Rs.25,000/- per laptop. Assume on a certain day, the shop manages to sells 20 such
3. Buy new fitness equipments to replace worn out equipments
3. Buy new fitness equipment to replace worn out equipments – OA
1. Cash comprises cash on hand and demand deposits. Obviously, this is a liquid asset of the
ratio with another company of a similar size or when you look into the trend of the
analyzed (either by comparison or tracking the ratio’s historical trend) to get the
trend or compare it with its peers. Going with this, a 16.3% EBITDA margin conveys
margin trend for the last 4 years, (all numbers in Rs Crs, except EBITDA margin):
Here is the PAT and PAT margin trend for ARBL:
The PAT and PAT margin trend seems impressive as we can clearly see a margin
only Rs.5000 and borrowed the additional Rs.5000 from his father to buy the oven.
gets very risky as the finance cost increases drastically. For this reason inspecting
financial leverage is 4, this means for every Rs.1 of equity, the company supports
ARBL supports Rs.1.61 of assets.
2. It is best to study the ratio’s recent trend or compare it with the company’s peers to
ratio with another company of a similar size or when you look into the trend of the
analyzed (either by comparison or tracking the ratio’s historical trend) to get the
trend or compare it with its peers. Going with this, a 16.3% EBITDA margin conveys
margin trend for the last 4 years, (all numbers in Rs Crs, except EBITDA margin):
Here is the PAT and PAT margin trend for ARBL:
The PAT and PAT margin trend seems impressive as we can clearly see a margin
only Rs.5000 and borrowed the additional Rs.5000 from his father to buy the oven.
gets very risky as the finance cost increases drastically. For this reason inspecting
financial leverage is 4, this means for every Rs.1 of equity, the company supports
ARBL supports Rs.1.61 of assets.
2. It is best to study the ratio’s recent trend or compare it with the company’s peers to
to what extent the assets are supported by equity.
This means JSIL supports Rs.3.68 units of assets for every unit of equity. Do
showroom with an expectation of selling the finished goods to prospective clients.
If a company is selling popular products, then the goods in the inventory gets
For example think about a bakery selling hot bread. If the bakery is popular, the
baker probably knows how many pounds of bread he is likely to sell on any given
day. For example, he could sell 200 pounds of bread daily. This means he has to
Obviously selling cars is not as easy as selling bread. If the manufacturer produces
50 cars, he may have to wait for sometime before he sells these cars. Assume, to
sell 50 cars (his inventory capacity) he will need 3 months. This means, every 3
However, what if the company has a great product (hence they are able to sell
Assume there are two companies (Company A and Company B) selling the same
amount of money the company can expect to receive after it sells everything and
Now assume, ARBL’s price jumps to Rs.750 while the EPS remains at Rs.21.49, the
1. P/E indicates how expensive or cheap the stock is trading at. Never buy stocks that
are trading at high valuations. I personally do not like to buy stocks that are trading
buying and selling, see what products are being consumed, keep an eye on the
PVR Cinemas Ltd (because I noticed PVR multiplexes mushrooming in the City),
3. Macro Trends – Keeping a general tab on the macroeconomic trend is a great way
cement companies are well positioned to leverage this macro trend.
4. Sectoral Trends – This is sector specific. One needs to track sectors to identify
emerging trends and companies within the sector that can benefit from it. For
Hence, most of the companies manufacture and sell just these three products.
Industries – the moat was manufacturing and selling pressure cookers, Gruh
example, when I decided to invest in PVR Cinemas, there were only 3 listed players
in that space. PVR, INOX, and Cinemax. PVR and Cinemax merged leaving just 2
point buying the stock. So how do we know if the stock is trading at the right price
perspective i.e to make a decision on whether to buy or not to buy a stock.
should consider buying into the stock during bear markets and not really selling the
product’s demand supply dynamics
Gives us an idea on their operational abilities, demand for their
products, and their positioning for future demand
and efforts required to sell the company’s products
personal force selling products on credit? Is the company offering attractive (but not
The cash flow from operations though a bit volatile has remained positive
However before you go out and buy the stock, you need to ensure the price is right.
a great price. In fact, I would even stretch to say that it is perfectly fine to buy a
mediocre business, as long as you are buying it at a great price. This only shows the
George offers to buy this machine from Vishal.
George should pay Vishal to buy this machine? Well, obviously to answer this
George. Assuming he buys this machine today (2014), over the next 10 years, the
buy the machine or invest the same Rs.X in a fixed deposit scheme which not only
George decides to buy the machine instead of the fixed deposit alternative. This
implies, George has foregone an opportunity to earn 8.5% risk free interest. This is
the ‘opportunity cost’ for having decided to buy the machine.
3. The opportunity cost for buying the pizza machine is, an investment option that
money does not remain the same across time. Meaning, the value of Rs.100 today is
Without getting into the mathematics involved (which by the way is really simple) I
George has to buy the pizza machine from Vishal, he has to ensure the price is
buying land, building and equipment. This is the cash that shareholders enjoy after
to be undervalued, hence one should look at buying the stock
valued. While no fresh buy is advisable, one can continue to hold on to the stock if
put. But should certainly not buy at these levels.
intrinsic value band. Clearly buying the stock at these levels implies one is buying at
15.6 –Spotting buying opportunities
year. After buying, all you had to do was stay put for the returns to roll!
year (2013) the markets were bearish, creating valuable buying opportunities in
version, of what I think is a fairly good checklist. I would encourage you to build your
value, then the stock is considered a good buy. Else it is not.
conviction to own the stock. Once you buy, stay put, ignore the daily volatility (that is
12. Stock trading below the range is considered a good buy, while the stock price above
safety’ simply suggests that an investor should buy stocks only when it is available at
4. At 230/- I would be a buyer in this stock with great conviction
buying it as soon as you can. As a long term investor, sweet deals like this (as in a
Throughout the module we have discussed about buying stocks. But what about
selling? When do we book profits? For instance assume you bought ARBL at around
return is generated in over a year’s time). So does that mean you actually sell out
this stock and book a profit? Well the decision to sell depends on the disruption in
Disruption in investible grade attributes – Remember the decision to buy the
buy ARBL just because it has declined by 15%. We buy ARBL only because it qualifies
investible grade attributes we do not buy. Therefore going by that logic, we hold on
some say holding many stocks help you diversify risk, others say holding far fewer
helps you take concentrated bets which can potentially reap great rewards. Here is
have the patience to stay put, markets can reward you fairly well. When I say
“reward you fairly well” I have a CAGR of about 15-18% in mind. I personally think
7. IPO’s – Avoid buying into IPOs. IPOs are usually overpriced. However if you were
compelled to buy into an IPO then analyze the IPO in the same 3 stage equity
price movements. In a forward market, the buyer and seller enter into an agreement to exchange
The other is a gold importer whose job is to sell gold at a whole sale price to jewelers, let us call
On 9th Dec 2014, ABC enters into an agreement with XYZ to buy 15 kilograms of gold at a certain
In a forwards contract, the party agreeing to buy the asset at some point in the future is called the
“Buyer of the Forwards Contract” , in this case it is ABC Jewelers.
tract, the party agreeing to sell the asset at some point in the future is called the “Seller of the For-
per the agreement, ABC Jewelers is entitled to buy Gold (999 purity) from XYZ Gold Dealers at a
Hence, XYZ Gold Dealers will have to buy Gold from the open market at Rs.2700/- per gram and
would have to sell it to ABC Jewelers at the rate of Rs.2450/- per gram thereby facing a loss in this
valued at Rs.3.075 Cr. However, according to the agreement, ABC Jewelers is obligated to buy
ABC Jewelers Buys gold from XYZ Gold
XYZ Gold DealersObligated to sell Gold to ABC
forced to buy gold at a higher rate from XYZ Gold Dealers hence incurring a loss.
ABC Jewelers Is obligated to buy gold from
XYZ Gold DealersEntitled to sell Gold to ABC @
obligated to buy gold at a higher rate from XYZ, thereby incurring a loss.
the price of gold increases (above Rs.2450/-), XYZ is forced to sell gold at a lower rate, thereby in-
joy the benefit of selling gold at a higher rate, at a time when gold is available at a lower rate in
1. Physical Settlement – – The full purchase price is paid by the buyer of a forward contract
and the actual asset is delivered by the seller. XYZ buys 15 Kgs of gold from the open market
In cash settlement, the buyer and the seller will simply exchange the cash diﬀerence. As per
the agreement, XYZ is obligated to sell Gold at Rs.2450/- per gram to ABC. In other words,
the price variation on either party, what about the risk involved? Do note, the risk is not just with
1. Liquidity Risk – In our example we have conveniently assumed that, ABC with a certain
2. Default Risk/ / Counter party risk – Consider this, assume the gold prices have reached
3. Regulatory Risk – The Forwards contract agreement is executed by a mutual consent of
duce the risks of the forward agreements.
5. In a forward agreement, the party agreeing to buy the asset is called the “Buyer of the For-
6. In a forward agreement the party agreeing to sell the asset is called the “Seller of the For-
7. A variation in the price would have an impact on both the buyer and the seller of the for-
9. The risk of a forward contract is reduced by a futures contract
the end of the chapter, we had listed down 4 key risks (or issues) with respect to the forwards con-
tracts and we concluded that, a futures contract is structured to overcome the critical risks of a
ited by the inherent risks involved, all of which is overcome by a futures agreement.
wards Market and at the same time, it eliminates the risks associated with the forwards contract.
ment with XYZ to buy a certain quantity of gold at a certain point in the future. Now imagine this,
This is mainly to overcome the risks involved in the forwards market. Let us look at each of these
High counter party risk No counter party risk
Contract Value – In our example of ABC jeweler and XYZ Gold Dealers, ABC agreed to buy 15 kgs
of Gold at the rate of Rs.2450/- per gram or Rs.24,50,000/- per kilogram. Since the deal was to buy
agreement i.e on 9th Dec 2014, both the parties would have had a gentleman’s word and nothing
be an opportunity to buy TCS, as I believe the stock price will eventually go up. Hence I would be
a buyer in TCS after such an announcement.
Now, instead of buying TCS shares in the spot market, I decide to buy the TCS Futures (for rea-
sons I will discuss in the next chapter). Having decided to buy futures, all I need to see is price at
rameters are prefixed. Lot size is the minimum number of shares that we need to buy/sell if
Now going back to the TCS futures trade, the idea is to buy a futures contract as I expect the TCS
stock price to go up. The price at which I would buy TCS Futures is Rs.2374.9/- per share. Remem-
ber the minimum number of shares that I need to buy is 125. The minimum number of shares is
So how do we buy the ‘Futures Contract’? Well, this is quite simple we can call our broker and ask
him to buy 1 lot of TCS futures at Rs.2374.9/- or we can buy it ourselves through the broker’s trad-
loaded on my market watch, all I need to do is just press F1 and buy the contract.
The moment I press the F1 key (expressing my interest to buy TCS futures) on my trading termi-
into the agreement. So as the first step, the broker’s risk management system/ software
counterparty match. The match has to be made between me – the buyer of the TCS futures
and the seller of the TCS futures. Remember, the stock exchange is a ‘Financial supermar-
seller of TCS futures obviously thinks, TCS futures price will go further down. Just like my ra-
tional as to why the TCS stock price will go higher, the seller has his own rational for his di-
rectional view, hence he wants to be a seller.
counterparty, the buyer and the seller digitally sign the futures agreement. This is mainly a
symbolic process. By agreeing to buy (or sell) the futures agreement, one gives consent to
agreement with a certain counterparty agreeing to buy 125 TCS shares from me (counterparty) at
per the agreement, I am entitled to buy the TCS shares at Rs.2374.9/- per share which is a much
The seller obviously incurs a loss, as he is forced to sell TCS shares at Rs.2374.9 per share as op-
posed to selling it in the open market at a much higher price of Rs.2450/- per share. Clearly, the
buyer’s gain is the seller loss.
as per the agreement, I am obligated to buy the TCS shares at Rs.2374.9/- per share which is a
I would obviously incur a loss as I’m forced to buy the TCS shares at Rs.2374.9/- per share as op-
posed to buying it in the open market at a much lower price of Rs.2300/- per share. Clearly, the
sellers gain is the buyer’s loss.
Scenario 3 – TCS stock price remains unchanged
Under such a situation, neither the buyer nor the seller benefit, hence there is no financial impact
So here is a situation – after buying the TCS futures on 15th Dec 2014 at Rs.2374.9/- the very next
have to sell 1 lot of TCS futures (so that my initial buy position is oﬀset). The following table sum-
open position or I can do it myself on the trading terminal. In the example we have a buy open po-
sition in TCS futures (1 lot), to oﬀset this open position the square oﬀ position would be to “sell 1
1. The broker (via trading terminal) scouts for a counterparty that would be willing to buy
the futures position from me. In simpler words “my existing buy position will simply be
transferred to someone else” . That ‘someone else’ by virtue of buying the contract from
me, now bears the risk of the TCS price going up or down. Hence this is simply referred to as
Dec 2014. As long as I continue to hold the futures, I continue to hold the risk of TCS price fluctua-
1 Buy / Long Expect price to go
2 Sell/Short Expect price to go
TCS futures from me. In other words, I transferred my buy position to someone else, and even
that ‘someone else’ (the counterparty) would also have made money on this contract by buying
9. When we square oﬀ an agreement we are essentially transferring the risk to someone else
12. In a futures contract, the buyer’s gain is the sellers loss and vice versa
way the expectation is that the stock price will go higher, why should one bother about buying fu-
In fact buying futures requires one to enter a digital agreement with the counterparty. Besides, a
suﬀer a loss. Contrast this (futures buying) with just buying stock and letting it reside in your DE-
really need futures? What makes it so attractive? Why not just buy the stock and stay oblivious to
A friend of mine is a real estate trader, he likes to buy apartments, sites, and buildings holds them
for a while and then sells them for a profit at a later stage. He believes this is better than trading
2018. Since the apartment was just notified and no work had started, the potential buyers were
only required to pay 10% of the actual buy value. This is pretty much the norm when it comes to
buying brand new apartments. The remaining 90% was scheduled to be paid as the construction
was entitled to buy a property worth Rs.10,000,000/-. In fact the property was so hot; all the 120
Fast forward to Dec 2014, my friend had a potential buyer for his apartment. Being a real estate
buyer struck a deal and settled on the sale at Rs.12,500,000/-.
New buyer agrees to pay the balance
for the sake of simplicity we will assume the opportunity to buy TCS occurs on 15th of Dec at
tween the two options at our disposal – Option 1 – Buy TCS stock in the spot market or Op-
Remarks The expectation is that the stock price will
Approximate buy Price Rs.2362/- per share
Approximate Sell Price Rs.2519/- per share
tion 2 – Buy TCS futures from the Derivatives market. Let us evaluate each option to understand
Option 1 – Buy TCS Stock in spot market
Buying TCS in spot market requires us to check for the price at which the stock is trading, calcu-
late the number of stocks we can aﬀord to buy (with the capital at our disposal). After buying the
credited to our DEMAT account. Once the stocks resides in the DEMAT account we just have to
wait for the right opportunity to sell the stocks.
Few salient features of buying the stock in the spot market (delivery based buying) –
1. Once we buy the stock (for delivery to DEMAT) we have to wait for at least 2 working days
before we can decide to sell it. This means even if the very next day if a good opportunity to
sell comes up, we cannot really sell the stock
2. We can buy the stock to the extent of the capital at our disposal. Meaning if our dispos-
able cash is Rs.100,000/- we can only buy to the extent of Rs.100,000/- not beyond this
really long time before deciding to sell
Specifically with Rs.100,000/- at our disposal, on 15th Dec 2014 we can buy –
Option 2 – Buy TCS Stock in the futures market
This means instead of 1 lot, maybe we can buy 2 lots of TCS futures. With 2 lots of TCS futures the
Futures Buy price – Rs. 2362/-
Futures Contract Value at the time of buying = Lot size *number of lots* Futures Buy Price
Futures Sell price = Rs.2519/-
Futures Contract Value at the time of selling = 125 * 2 * 2519
All through we have discussed about rewards of transacting in futures, but what about the risk in-
Buy Date 15th Dec 2014 15th Dec 2014
Buy Price Rs.2362 per share Rs.2362 per share
Buy Value (Contract Value) 42 * 2362 = 100,000/- 2 * 125 * 2362 = 590,500/-
Sell Date 23rd Dec 2014 23rd Dec 2014
Sell Price Rs.2519/- per share Rs.2519/- per share
Sell Value 42 * 2519 = 105,798 250 * 2519 = 629,750/-
times leverage are you exposed to?” The higher the leverage, higher is the risk, and the higher is
This means every Rs.1/- in the trading account can buy upto Rs.7.14/- worth of TCS. This is a very
manageable ratio. However if the leverage increases then the risk also increases. Allow me to ex-
So, the higher the leverage, the higher is the risk. When leverage is high, only a small move in the
Possible Price on 23rd Dec Buyer P&L (Price on 23rd Dec – Buy
This is the way you need to read this table, – considering you are a buyer at Rs.2362/- , what
In fact if you recollect from the previous chapter we stated that if the buyer is making Rs.X/- as
profit then the seller is suﬀering a loss to the extent of Rs.X/-. So assuming  23rd Dec TCS is Trad-
ing at 2600, the buyer makes a profit of Rs.238/- per share and the seller would be making a loss
of Rs.238/- per share, provided that the seller has shorted the share at Rs.2362/-.
Another way to look at this is that the money is being transferred from the seller’s pocket to the
buyer’s pocket. It is just a transfer of money and not creation of money!
Further, let us now plot a graph of the possible price on 23rd December versus the buyers P&L.
As you can see, any price above the buy price (2362) results in a profit and any price below the
buy price results in a loss. Since the trade involved purchasing 2 lots of futures (250 shares) a 1
tionality here. The proportionality comes from the fact that the money made by the buyer is the
loss suﬀered by the seller (provided they have bought/short the same price), and vice versa.
6. The profits made by the buyer is equivalent to the loss made by the seller and vice versa
7. The higher the leverage, the higher is the risk and therefore the higher the chance of mak-
c. An example of the above point would be to buy Infosys Futures at 9:15 AM at a price
of 1951 and sell it by 9:17AM at 1953. Since Infosys lot size is 250, one would stand to
12. The profits made by the buyer is equivalent to the loss made by the seller and vice versa
14. The higher the leverage, the higher the risk
ample quoted, 3 months from now ABC Jewelers agrees to buy 15Kgs of Gold at Rs.2450/- per
wards agreement works on a gentleman’s word. Consider a situation where the price of gold has
Assume on 1st Dec 2014 at around 11:30 AM, you decide to buy Hindalco Futures at Rs.165/-.
tures buy price is no longer treated as Rs.165 but instead it will be considered as Rs.168.3/- (clos-
for the day, and the next day is considered a fresh start. Hence the buy price is now considered at
its that you are entitled to receive is credited to your trading account and the buy price is reset to
matically debited from your trading account. Also, the buy price is now reset to Rs.171.6/-.
justment by means of which the exchange drastically reduces the counterparty default risk. As
Buy Price Rs.938.7/- per share
take the liberty to cut through the remaining days and proceed directly to the last day of trade.
P&L = (Diﬀerence b/w the futures buy & sell price ) * Lot Size
Buy Price = 938.7, Sell Price = 955, Lot size = 250
3. Both the buyer and the seller of the futures agreement will have to deposit the initial mar-
Let us take up a case where one decides to buy the futures contract of IDEA Cellular Limited, expir-
6000 (2000 * 3). Once this is done simply click on the radio button, either a buy or sell (depending
this, if I buy IDEA Cellular Limited futures contract at 149/- expiring on 29th January 2015, with an
when I buy a futures contract, it has to move in my favor on or before the expiry day, else there is
Forge, I would like to buy its futures today. Have a look at the snapshot below –
that Bharat Forge will rally from now, all the way till the last week of Feb 2015. But If I buy the fu-
buy the January expiry contract. In fact for reasons similar to this, NSE allows you to select a con-
At any given point, NSE allows us to buy a futures contract with 3 diﬀerent expiries. For example
tures price, which should be less than far month futures price. There is a mathematical reason for
long term view, I can buy the futures contract expiring on 26th February 2015 and hold the Febru-
buying the February contract, I can go ahead and  buy the January contract, hold on to it till
around expiry, and very close to expiry, I can square oﬀ the January contract and buy the Febru-
So under what circumstances would one want to rollover rather than buy a long dated futures
contract? Well, one of the main reasons for this is the ease of buying and selling aka ‘The liquid-
more traders trading the same contract the ease of buying and selling gets better.
At times there are opportunities created where by simultaneously buying the current month con-
tract and selling the mid month contract or vice versa, one can make money. Opportunities of
We know why margins are charged – mainly from the risk management perspective. Now, what
kind of risk would exist if we are buying the contract on one hand and selling the same type of
contract on the other? The risk is drastically reduced. Let me illustrate this with numbers –
Scenario 1 – Trader buys only Bharat Forge Limited’s January Futures
After buying, assume the spot price drops to Rs.1011/- (10 point fall)
Scenario 2 – Trader buys January and sells February Futures
Scenario 3 – Trader sells January and buys February Futures
short on another contract, the risk is virtually reduced to zero. However it is not completely risk
free, one has to account for the liquidity, volatility, and execution risk etc. But by and large the
risk reduces drastically. So when risk reduces drastically, the margins should also reduce drasti-
This is the margin requirement (Rs.37,362/-) when we intend to buy January contracts of Bharat
This is the margin requirement (Rs.37,629/-) when we intend to sell February contracts of Bharat
And this is the margin requirement (Rs.7,213/-) when we intend to buy January contract and sell
and sold simultaneously the risk reduces drastically, hence the margin requirement. As we can
8. Calendar spread is trading technique which involves buying a certain month contract and
selling another month contract simultaneously for the same underlying
9. When a calendar spread is initiated, the margins required are lower since the risk is drasti-
Margins are charged from a risk management perspective. It helps in preventing any undesired
counter party default. The risk management system at the broker’s oﬀice (often called the RMS
system) is responsible for overseeing the overall risk management. You may be interested to
When you place a trade, let us say to buy a futures contract (via a buy order entry form) you are
essentially conveying the following details to the risk management system (RMS) –
1. The contract you wish to buy (like TCS futures, IDEA futures etc)
2. The quantity you wish to buy ( number of lots)
3. The price at which you want to buy (market or limit)
you are also exposed to the ‘overnight risk’ .
Overnight risk is risk of carrying the position overnight. For example assume I’m holding a long
day as it becomes more expensive for BPCL to buy crude oil from the international markets.
is called ‘overnight risk’ . Anyway, the point that I’m trying to make here is straightforward – from
the RMS system’s perspective the longer you wish to hold the trade, the higher is the risk you are
are keeping the RMS system in total darkness with respect to your risk appetite. Do note, this is
more clarity on your trade. For example assume I buy BPCL futures Rs.649/-, in the absence of
specifying a stoploss, I’m virtually exposed to an unlimited risk. However if I specify my stoploss
the trade. Hence there is complete clarity on the amount of risk I’m willing to take, which from
So both – the duration and the stoploss of the trade gives more clarity about your risk appetite to
Well, think about it – the more clarity you provide in terms of the risk you face, the higher clarity
If you go to a consumer electronic store and enquire about the price of a television, the seller will
assume you are a regular customer and he will quote the normal selling price. However if you tell
So far, one thing is clear, the more information (in terms of risk) you are willing to convey to the
order (to either buy or sell) you can specify the product type. There are many Product types and
NRML – NRML is a standard product type. Use this when you intend to buy and hold the futures
Remember when you use NRML, the risk management system has no additional information on
Use NRML when you intend to buy and hold the futures position over multiple days.  However do
The snapshot below shows the buy CO form –
The snapshot below shows the BO buy order form, the green box highlights the SL placements –
Well, it literally makes no diﬀerence to it from the risk management perspective. Remember the
RMS is only worried about your risk, and not your reward. Hence for this reason, the margin
3. The number of lots that a trader can buy for the given amount of money in his trading ac-
Task 1 – A trader has Rs.80,000/- in his trading account. He wants to buy ACC Cements Limited Fu-
tures can he buy on an intraday basis and on a multiple day basis?
once I mention the stop loss, the calculator calculates the amount as shown below
Rs.9,062/-, which is remarkably lower compared to NRML margin of Rs.26,135/- and MIS margin of
fact most of us would have been in this situation) – you buy a stock at Rs.250, with an expectation
tention to lock the profits, it is called “Trailing Stop Loss” . Do note, in this example I have ran-
the momentum and close in on a higher profit.
Besides one can also trail the stop loss
11. A trailing SL is a great way to ride the momentum in a script
transaction. For example imagine this transaction – You buy an apartment today for let us say
Rs.X, sell it 2 years later for Rs.X+Y. The profit made on the transaction is the incremental value
In fact most of the day to day transactions requires us to buy something first and sell it later
rection i.e. to sell first and buy later.
So what would compel a trader to sell something first and then buy it later? Well, it is quite simple
– When we believe the price of an asset such as a stock is likely to increase we buy the stock first
and sell it later. However, when we believe the price of the stock is going to decline, we usually
sell it first and buy it later!
To short stock or futures, you will have to sell first and buy later. In fact the best way to learn
b. Presence of the resistance level
d. The Risk & Reward ratio is satisfactory
tures contract) you wish to short and press F2 on your trading platform. Doing so invokes the sell order
Trade Type Short (sell first and buy later)
selling and buying price – i.e. Rs.40/- (1990 – 1950).
If you look at it from another angle (i.e. the usual buy first and sell later angle), this is as good as
buying at Rs.1950 and selling at Rs.1990. It is just that the trader has reversed the transaction or-
der by selling first and buying later.
will have to close the position by buying the stock back.
it from the regular buy first sell later angle – this transaction is as good as buying at Rs.2000/- and
selling at Rs.1990/ , and again if we reverse the order it would be sell first and buy later.
Meaning you can initiate the short trade anytime during the day, but you will have to buy back
When you short in the spot market, you obviously sell first. The moment you sell a stock, the back-
not diﬀerentiate between a regular selling of stock (from DEMAT account) and a short sale. From
to deliver the same. In order to do so, you need to keep the shares ready in your DEMAT account
(Selling Price – Buying price) * Lot Size
1. Shorting requires us to sell first and buy later
one can buy or sell a particular stock or futures. If a stock is highly liquid (read it as very easy to
buy/sell) then it would attract seasoned traders to trade in large quantities at ease, without really
investor intends to buy 5000 shares of MRF Limited. As you may know MRF Limited is probably the
rently trading at Rs.38,351/- per share. Therefore buying 5000 shares at this price would translate
large one for a typical Foreign Institution. Anyway given that they want to buy 5000 shares let us
If you wish to buy large quantity of shares, then you need to look at how many shares are being
trade you carry out by buying at the first best available sell price and selling at the first best avail-
able buy price. Let us execute this on MRF (please refer to the order book snapshot above) –
either buy or sell the stock, you are likely to lose 0.3% due to impact cost. This may not always
your broker to buy or sell a stock at market, the price you see on your screen and the price at
Price at which you can Buy = Rs. 8,769.9
Price at which you can sell = Rs. 8,768.8
This means if you buy or sell nifty futures at market price, you are likely to lose just about
3. The spread between the buying and selling price is also an indicator of liquidity
1. It is diversified – At times taking a directional call on a single stock can be a tough task,
this is mainly from the risk perceptive. For example let us just say I decide to buy Infosys Lim-
tures on the other hand has a diversified portfolio of 50 stocks. As it is a portfolio of stocks,
atic risk’ and deal with only with ‘systematic risk’ . I know these are new jargons being intro-
Liquid stocks are hard to manipulate, hence they usually move based on the demand sup-
5. A round trip trade is an arbitrary quick instantaneous trade which involves buying at the
best available sell price and selling at the best available buy price
dends, time to expiry etc. In a very loose sense it is simply is a mathematical expression to equate
Note, ‘rf’ is the risk free rate that you can earn for the entire year (365 days); considering the ex-
One can take the RBI’s 91 day Treasury bill as a proxy for the short term risk free rate. You can find
tures should be trading at a given risk free rate and number of days to expiry. Let us take this fur-
If the futures is trading higher than the spot, which mathematically speaking is the natural order
2. The futures remained at premium to the spot throughout the series
to short term demand and supply imbalances where the futures would trade cheaper than its cor-
The thumb rule in any sort of ‘spread trade’ is to buy the cheaper asset and sell the expensive one.
Hence going by this, we can sell Wipro Futures on one hand and simultaneously buy Wipro in the
the expiry of the futures contract. This would require you to sell Wipro in spot market and buy
sive. Hence we sell the expensive contract and buy the relatively cheaper one. Therefore the
trade set up would require me to buy the mid month futures contract @ 665 and sell the current
Sell the current month futures @ 700
Buy the mid month futures @ 665
Do note – because you are buying and selling the same underlying futures of diﬀerent expiries,
8. Cash and carry is a spread where one can buy in the spot and sell in the futures
9. Calendar spread is an extension of a cash and carry where one buys a contract and simul-
taneously sells another contract (with a diﬀerent expiry) but of the same underlying
2. Sell the stock and hope to buy it back later at a lower price
But what about the 2nd option ? Well, the 2nd option where the investor sells the position and
buys back the same at a later stage requires one to time the market, which is not something easy
we are hedging the risk, but what kind of risk?
When you buy the stock of a company you are essentially exposed to risk. In fact there are two
types of risk – Systematic Risk and Unsystematic Risk. When you buy a stock or a stock future,
you are automatically exposed to both these risks.
All these reasons represent a form of risk, in fact there could be many other similar reasons and
this list can go on. However if you notice, there is one thing common to all these risks – they are
all company specific risk. For example imagine you have an investable capital of Rs.100,000/-.
duct, then Tech Mahindra’s stock price will go down and not its competitors. Clearly these risks
which are specific to the company aﬀect only the company in question and not others. Such risks
are often called the “Unsystematic Risk”.
Unsystematic risk can be diversified, meaning instead of investing all the money in one company,
you can choose to diversify and invest in 2-3 diﬀerent companies (preferably from diﬀerent sec-
tors). When you do so, unsystematic risk is drastically reduced. Going back to the above example
imagine instead of buying HCL for the entire capital, you decide to buy HCL for Rs.50,000/- and
stock price declines (owing to the unsystematic risk) the damage is only on half of the investment
higher the diversification and therefore lesser the unsystematic risk.
that the unsystematic risk is completely diversified. Research has it that up to 21 stocks in the
portfolio will have the required necessary diversification eﬀect and anything beyond 21 stocks
may not help much in diversification.
The graph below should give you a fair sense of how diversification works –
As you can notice from the graph above, the unsystematic risk drastically reduces when you diver-
sify and add more stocks. However after about 20 stocks the unsystematic risk is not really diversi-
fiable, this is evident as the graph starts to flatten out after 20 stocks.  In fact the risk that remains
even after diversification is called the “Systematic Risk”.
Systematic risk is the risk that is common to all stocks. These are usually the macroeconomic
risks which tend to aﬀect the whole market. Example of systematic risk include –
Of course the list can go on but I suppose you got a fair idea of what constitutes systematic risk.
Systematic risk aﬀects all stocks. So assuming you have a well diversified 20 stocks portfolio, a
atic risk is inherent in the system and it cannot really be diversified. However systematic risk can
Remember, we diversify to minimize unsystematic risk and we hedge to minimize systematic risk.
2. How risky (or volatile)is stock XYZ compared to market indices (Nifty, Sensex)?
3. How risky is stock XYZ compared to stock ABC?
lieved that BPCL is 30% less risky than markets
a. One can even say, BPCL relatively carries less systematic risk
direction;however the stock is relatively less risky. A
Do recall there are 2 types of risk – systematic and unsystematic risk. When we have a diversified
portfolio we are naturally minimizing the unsystematic risk. What is left after this is the system-
atic risk. As we know systematic risk is the risk associated with the markets, hence the best way
to insulate against market risk is by employing an index which represents the market. Hence the
Nifty futures come as a natural choice to hedge the systematic risk.
= 978,400/- 115 zerodha.com/varsity
3. There are two types of risk – systematic and unsystematic risk
4. Systematic risk is risk specific to macroeconomic events. Systematic risk can be hedged.
Systematic risk is common to all stocks
5. Unsystematic risk is the risk associated with the company. This is unique to each com-
pany. Unsystematic risk cannot be hedge, but can be diversified
6. Research suggests, beyond 21 stocks unsystematic risk cannot be diversified any further
is often asked- “What is Open Interest (OI)?” , “How is it diﬀerent from Volumes?” , and “How can
we benefit from the Volumes and Open interest data?” Let me attempt to answer these questions
with the Volumes to make better decisions while trading. Also, I would suggest you refresh your
understanding on Volumes from here.
buyer and a seller. Let us say the seller sells 1 contract to the buyer. The buyer is said to be long
on the contract and the seller is said to be short on the same contract.  The open interest in this
Monday: Arjun buys 6 futures contracts and Varun buys 4 futures contracts, while Neha sells all of
Thursday: A big guy named Vikram comes to the market and sells 25 contracts. John decides to
liquidate 10 contracts, and hence buys 10 contracts from Vikram, eﬀectively transferring his 10
contracts to Vikram. Arjun adds 10 more contracts from Vikram and finally Varun decides to buy
the remaining 5 contracts from Vikram. In summary, 15 new contracts got added to the system.
Friday: Vikram decides to square oﬀ 20 of the 25 contracts he had sold previously.  So he buys 10
12.2 – OI and Volume interpretation
Open interest information tells us how many contracts are open and live in the market. Volume
on the other hand tells us how many trades were executed on the given day. For every 1 buy and
1 sell, volume adds up to 1. For instance, on a given day, 400 contracts were bought and 400 were
sold, then the volume for the day is 400 and not 800. Clearly volumes and open interest are two
diﬀerent; buy seemingly similar set of information. The volume counter starts from zero at the
start of the day and increments as and when new trades occur. Hence the volume data always in-
creases on an intra-day basis. However, OI is not discrete like volumes, OI stacks up or reduces
marize the OI and volume information.
Notice how OI and volume change on a daily basis. Today’s volume has no implication on tomor-
row’s volume. However, it is not true for OI. From a stand-alone perspective both OI and volume
The following tables summarizes the trader’s perspective with respect to changes in volume and
Unlike volumes, the change in Open interest does not really convey any directional view on mar-
Unlike volumes, the change in Open interest does not really convey any directional view on mar-
Price Volume Trader’s Perception
Price Volume Trader’s Perception
Decrease Decrease Bearish trend could probably end, expect
Increase Decrease Bullish trend could probably end, expect
Decrease Decrease Bearish trend could probably end, expect
Increase Decrease Bullish trend could probably end, expect
Price Volume Trader’s Perception
4. Unlike volumes, OI is continuous data
5. On a stand along basis OI and Volume information does not convey information, hence it
As with any of the previous modules in Varsity, we will again make the same old
buyer or seller of these options. Based on what you choose to do, the P&L profile
evaluating an opportunity to buy 1 acre of land that Venu owns. The land is valued
news’ turns out to be a rumor- which means Ajay buys the land from Venu today
uncertain whether to buy the land from Venu or not. While Ajay is muddled in this
thought, Venu is quite clear about selling the land if Ajay is willing to buy.
2. Against this fees, Venu agrees to sell the land after 6 months to Ajay
means irrespective of what the price would be 6 months later he gets to buy the
o At the end of the 6 months, if Ajay does not want to buy the land he has the right to
This means Ajay now enjoys the right to buy a piece of land at Rs.500,000/- when in
the open market the same land is selling at a much higher value of – Rs.10,00,000/-.
Clearly Ajay is making a steal deal here. Hence he would go ahead and demand
Venu to  sell him the land. Venu is obligated to sell him the land at a lesser value,
value of the land is much higher in the open market, is forced to sell it at a much
is a sudden rush to sell out the land. As a result, the price of the land goes down to
So what do you think Ajay will do now? Clearly it does not make sense to buy the
does not make sense to buy the land –
buy the land he has to shell out Rs.500,000/- plus he had paid Rs.100,000/- towards
the agreement fees. Which means he is in effect paying Rs.600,000/- to buy a piece
buy the land. However do note, as per the agreement Ajay has to let go of
the deal and would not buy the land. Why you may ask, well here is the math –
Clearly it does not make sense to buy a piece of land at Rs.600,000/- when it is
worth Rs.500,000/-. Do note, since Ajay has already committed 1lk, he could still buy
4. Why do you think Venu is taking such a big risk? He would lose a lot of money if the
can call off the deal) and Venu has an obligation (if the situation demands, he has to
o Since Venu has received the advance from Ajay, Venu is called the ‘agreement seller
or Writer’ and Ajay is called the ‘agreement buyer’
called an Options Buyer and Venu the Options Seller/writer.
o As a thumb rule, in an options agreement the buyer always has a right and the seller
Assume a stock is trading at Rs.67/- today. You are given a right today to buy the
than Rs. 75, would you buy it?. Obviously you would, as this means to say that after
1 month even if the share is trading at 85, you can still get to buy it at Rs.75!
If the share price moves above Rs. 75, you can exercise your right and buy the
your right and you do not need to buy the shares. All you lose is Rs. 5/- in this case.
sense to buy it at Rs.75/- as effectively you would spending Rs.80/- (75+5) for a stock
Rs.80/- to buy a stock which is available at Rs.75/-, hence you would not invoke your
right to buy the stock at Rs.75/-.
the core logic of a call option. What remains unexplained is the finer points, all of
matter) to increase, it always makes sense to buy a call option!
“The buyer of the call option has the right, but not the obligation to buy an agreed
seller of the option at a certain time (the expiration date) for a certain price (the strike
price). The seller (or “writer”) is obligated to sell the commodity or financial instrument
should the buyer so decide. The buyer pays a fee (called a premium) for this right”.
2. An Option is a tool for protecting your position and reducing risk
3. A buyer of the call option has the right and the seller has an obligation to make
4. The option is only given to one party in the transaction ( buyer of an option)
5. The option seller is also called the option writer
6. At the time of agreement the option buyer pays a certain amount to the option
seller, this is called the ‘Premium’ amount
8. The option buyer benefits only if the price of the asset increases higher than the
9. If the asset price stays at or below the strike, the buyer does not benefit, for this
reason it always makes sense to buy options when you expect the price to increase
10. Statistically the option seller has higher odds of winning in an typical option contract
1. It makes sense to be a buyer of a call option when you expect the underlying price
2. If the underlying price remains flat or goes down then the buyer of the call option
3. The money the buyer of the call option would lose is equivalent to the premium
(agreement fees) the buyer pays to the seller/writer of the call option.
Consider the strike price as the anchor price at which the two parties (buyer and
seller) agree to enter into an options agreement. For instance, in the previous
For example, if the buyer is willing to buy ITC Limited’s Call Option of Rs.350 (350
being the strike price) then it indicates that the buyer is willing to pay a premium
today to buy the rights of ‘buying ITC at Rs.350 on expiry’. Needless to say he will
buy ITC at Rs.350, only if ITC is trading above Rs.350.
as Open Interest, volume, bid-ask quantity etc. I would suggest you ignore all of it
1. This entitles the buyer to buy ITC shares at the end of expiry at Rs.340. Of course, you now know
under which circumstance it would make sense to buy ITC at 340 at the end of expiry
underlying price has to increase for the buyer of the call option to benefit.
Exercising of an option contract is the act of claiming your right to buy the options
right to buy the stock at the agreed strike price. Clearly he or she would do it only if
Hence, assume with 15 days to expiry one buys ITC 340 Call option when ITC is
trading at 330 in the spot market. Further assume, after he buys the 340 call option,
buyer cannot ask for a settlement (he cannot exercise) against the call option he
This is the snapshot of the call option to buy Ashok Leyland Ltd at the strike price of
Premium is the money required to be paid by the option buyer to the option
seller/writer. Against the payment of premium, the option buyer buys the right to
exercise his desire to buy (or sell in case of put options) the asset at the strike price
element of chance he may be willing to take the risk, provided the premium will be
If you enter into this options agreement as a writer/seller, then you are giving the
right (to the buyer) of buying Infosys option at Rs. 2300 one month down the lane
increase the stock price? Will the option seller still go ahead and accept Rs.20/- as
the premium for the agreement? Clearly, it may not be worth to take the risk at
As highlighted in green, this is a Call Option to buy JP Associates at Rs.25/-. The
Assume there are 2 traders – ‘Trader A’ and ‘Trader B’. Trader A wants to buy this
agreement (option buyer) and Trader B wants to sell (write) this agreement.
sell Trader A 8000 shares of JP Associates on 26th March 2015, if Trader A decides to
at Rs.32/-. This means the option buyer (Trader A) will exercise his right to buy 8000
shares of JP Associates at 25/-. In other words, he is getting to buy JP Associates at
o On 26th Trader A exercises his right to buy 8000 shares from Trader B
o Trader A almost immediately sells these shares in the open market at Rs.32 per
Another way to look at it is that the option buyer is making a profit of Rs.7/- per
option buyer 8000 shares, the option seller directly gives him the cash equivalent of
Of course, the option buyer had initially spent Rs.10,800/- towards purchasing this
1. It makes sense to buy a call option only when one anticipates an increase in the
2. The strike price is the anchor price at which both the option buyer and option writer
4. Exercising of an option contract is the act of claiming your right to buy the options
understood the broad context under which it makes sense to buy a call option. In
firm understanding on both buying and selling of the call option. Before we move
1. It makes sense to be a buyer of a call option when you expect the underlying price
2. If the underlying price remains flat or goes down then the buyer of the call option
3. The money the buyer of the call option would lose is equivalent to the premium
(agreement fees) the buyer pays to the seller/writer of the call option
4. However I do not want to buy the stock for delivery (yet) as I’m worried about a
5. Extending the above point, the worry of M2M losses prevents me from buying Bajaj
be intense if the weakness in the stock persists. However as per my estimate the
In the context of my dilemma, clearly buying a call option on Bajaj Auto makes sense
buy 2050 strike call option by paying a premium of Rs.6.35/- (highlighted in red box
is defined as the non – negative value which the option buyer is entitled to if he
buyer of a call option) how much money you would receive upon expiry, if the call
option you hold is profitable. Mathematically it is defined as –
Auto and in the process make some generalizations on the call option buyer’s P&L.
3.4 – Generalizing the P&L for a call option buyer
as the buyer of Bajaj Auto’s 2050 call option would make under the various possible
changes, the fact that I have paid Rs.6.35/- remains unchanged. This is the cost that I
have incurred in order to buy the 2050 Call Option. Let us keep this in perspective
1. Generalization 1 – For a call option buyer a loss occurs when the spot price moves below the
strike price. However the loss to the call option buyer is restricted to the extent of the premium
3. From the above 2 generalizations it is fair for us to say that the buyer of the call
option has a limited risk and a potential to make an unlimited profit.
As you notice from the table above, the buyer suffers a maximum loss (Rs. 6.35 in
3.5 – Call option buyer’s payoff
option buyer’s payoff; I will reiterate the same –
1. The maximum loss the buyer of a call option experiences is, to the extent of the
premium paid. The buyer experiences a loss as long as the spot price is below the
2. The call option buyer has the potential to realize unlimited profits provided the spot
above the strike price, the call option buyer first needs to recover the premium he
4. The point at which the call option buyer completely recovers the premium he has
5. The call option buyer truly starts making a profit only beyond the breakeven point
Again, from the graph one thing is very evident – A call option buyer has a limited
risk but unlimited profit potential. And with this I hope you are now clear with the
call option from the buyer’s perspective. In the next chapter we will look into the Call
Option from the seller’s perspective.
1. It makes sense to be a buyer of a call option when you expect the underlying price
2. If the underlying price remains flat or goes down then the buyer of the call option
3. The money the buyer of the call option would lose is equivalent to the premium
(agreement fees) the buyer pays to the seller/writer of the call option
6. The maximum loss the buyer of a call option experiences is to the extent of the
7. The call option buyer has the potential to make unlimited profits provided the spot
above the strike price, the call option buyer first needs to recover the premium he
9. The point at which the call option buyer completely recovers the premium he has
10. The call option buyer truly starts making a profit only beyond the breakeven point
writer and the option buyer are somewhat comparable to these brothers. They are
you should remember here – whatever happens to the option seller in terms of the
P&L, the exact opposite happens to option buyer and vice versa. For example if the
option writer is making Rs.70/- in profits, this automatically means the option buyer
o If the option buyer has limited risk (to the extent of premium paid), then the option
seller has limited profit (again to the extent of the premium he receives)
o If the option buyer has unlimited profit potential then the option seller potentially
o The breakeven point is the point at which the option buyer starts to make money,
o If option buyer is making Rs.X in profit, then it implies the option seller is making a
o If the option buyer is losing Rs.X, then it implies the option seller is making Rs.X in
o Lastly if the option buyer is of the opinion that the market price will increase (above
the strike price to be particular) then the option seller would be of the opinion that
Option from the seller’s perspective, which is the objective of this chapter.
P&L symmetry between the option seller and the buyer, the discussion going
4.2 – Call option seller and his thought process
1. The price of the land moves above Rs.500,000 (good for Ajay – option buyer)
2. The price stays flat at Rs.500,000 (good for Venu – option seller)
3. The price moves lower than Rs.500,000 (good for Venu – option seller)
If you notice, the option buyer has a statistical disadvantage when he buys options
– only 1 possible scenario out of the three benefits the option buyer. In other words
2 out of the 3 scenarios benefit the option seller. This is just one of the incentives
for the option writer to sell options. Besides this natural statistical edge, if the
option seller also has a good market insight then the chances of the option seller
am I suggesting that an option seller will always make money.
chapter and build a case for a call option seller and understand how he would view
o Since the expectation is that the stock price won’t increase, selling the Bajaj Auto’s
With these thoughts, the option writer decides to sell a call option. The most
important point to note here is – the option seller is selling a call option because he
he believes that, selling the call option and collecting the premium is a good
forward in this module. For now, let us assume the option seller decides to sell Bajaj
chapter to understand the P&L profile of the call option seller and in the process
2. The intrinsic value of an option (upon expiry) remains the same irrespective of
1. When an option seller sells options he receives a premium (for example Rs.6.35/).
Rs.1.35/-. Hence for an option seller to experience a loss he has to first lose the
2. You can extend the same argument to the option buyer. Since the option buyer
1. As long as Bajaj Auto stays at or below the strike price of 2050, the option seller gets
do note the profit remains constant at Rs.6.35/-.
premium received as long as the spot price remains at or below the strike price (for a call option)
3. From the above 2 generalizations it is fair to conclude that, the option seller can
Breakdown point for the call option seller = Strike Price + Premium Received
So, the breakeven point for a call option buyer becomes the breakdown point for
4.3 – Call Option seller pay-off
call option buyer and the seller. In fact the same can be observed if we plot the P&L
graph of an option seller. Here is the same –
The call option sellers P&L payoff looks like a mirror image of the call option buyer’s
4. Above 2056.35 the call option seller starts losing money. In fact the slope of the P&L
Think about the risk profile of both the call option buyer and a call option seller. The
call option buyer bears no risk. He just has to pay the required premium amount to
the call option seller, against which he would buy the right to buy the underlying at
a later point. We know his risk (maximum loss) is restricted to the premium he has
However when you think about the risk profile of a call option seller, we know that
he bears an unlimited risk. His potential loss can exponentially increase as and
stock exchange – how can they manage the risk exposure of an option seller in the
option seller decides to default?
such a huge default risk, hence it is mandatory for the option seller to park some
money as margins. The margins charged for an option seller is similar to the margin
And here is the margin requirement for selling 2050 call option.
deal with it at a later stage. For now, I just want you to note that option selling
call options buying and selling. Unlike other topics in Finance, options are a little
remember with respect to buying and selling call options.
o You buy a call option only when you are bullish about the underlying asset. Upon
o Buying a call option is also referred to as ‘Long on a Call Option’ or simply ‘Long Call’
o To buy a call option you need to pay a premium to the option writer
o The call option buyer has limited risk (to the extent of the premium paid) and an
o The breakeven point is the point at which the call option buyer neither makes
With respect to option selling
o You sell a call option (also called option writing) only when you believe that upon
o Selling a call option is also called ‘Shorting a call option’ or simply ‘Short Call’
o When you sell a call option you receive the premium amount
o The profit of an option seller is restricted to the premium he receives, however his
o The breakdown point is the point at which the call option seller gives up all the
o Since short option position carries unlimited risk, he is required to deposit margin
o When you are bullish on a stock you can either buy the stock in spot, buy its futures,
o When you are bearish on a stock you can either sell the stock in the spot (although
based on whether you are an option buyer/ seller
o The net P&L calculation methodology is different for the call option buyer and seller.
and by noon the same is trading at Rs.9/- I can choose to sell and book profits
buyer will have to mandatory wait till the expiry date to exercise his right. The
he has bought a Bajaj Auto 2050 Call option, then for the buyer to be profitable
not it the option is worthless to the buyer and he will lose all the premium money
that he paid to the Option seller.
American Options – In an American Option, the option buyer can exercise his right
to buy the option whenever he deems appropriate during the tenure of the options
and not really depended on expiry. For instance he buys Bajaj Auto 2050 Call
days for expiry. The next day Bajaj Auto crosses 2050. In such a case, the buyer of
Baja Auto 2050 American Call option can exercise his right, which means the seller is
obligated to settle with the option buyer. The expiry date has little significance here.
buy an option now and sell it later, maybe in 30 minutes after we purchase, how
strong rumors). Now because Venu carries addition risk of getting ‘exercised’ on any
(so that he is compensated for the risk he takes).
are now European in nature, which means the buyer can exercise his option
1. You sell a call option when you are bearish on a stock
2. The call option buyer and the seller have a symmetrically opposite P&L behavior
3. When you sell a call option you receive a premium
4. Selling a call option requires you to deposit a margin
5. When you sell a call option your profit is limited to the extent of the premium you
buyers and sellers perspective. If you are indeed familiar with the call option then
put option (from the buyer’s perspective) is the view on markets should be bearish
as opposed to the bullish view of a call option buyer.
The put option buyer is betting on the fact that the stock price will go down (by the
Option agreement. In a put option agreement, the buyer of the put option can buy
the right to sell a stock at a price (strike price) irrespective of where the
Remember this generality – whatever the buyer of the option anticipates, the seller
expects the same a market can never exist. So if the Put option buyer expects the
market to go down by expiry, then the put option seller would expect the market (or
A put option buyer buys the right to sell the underlying to the put option writer at
a predetermined rate (Strike price. This means the put option seller, upon expiry will
have to buy if the ‘put option buyer’ is selling him.  Pay attention here – at the time
of the agreement the put option seller is selling a right to the put option buyer
where in the buyer can ‘sell’ the underlying to the ‘put option seller’ at the time of
o The party agreeing to pay a premium is called the ‘contract buyer’ and the party
receiving the premium is called the ‘contract seller’
o The contract buyer pays a premium and buys himself a right
o The contract seller receives the premium and obligates himself
o The contract buyer will decide whether or not to exercise his right on the expiry day
o If the contract buyer decides to exercise his right then he gets to sell the underlying
(maybe a stock) at the agreed price (strike price) and the contract seller will be
obligated to buy this underlying from the contract buyer
o Obviously the contract buyer will exercise his right only if the underlying price is
trading below the strike price – this means by virtue of the contract the buyer holds,
he can sell the underlying at a much higher price to the contract seller when the
Consider this situation, between the Contract buyer and the Contract seller –
o Contract buyer buys the right to sell Reliance to contract seller at Rs.850/- upon
o To obtain this right, contract buyer has to pay a premium to the contract seller
o Against the receipt of the premium contract seller will agree to buy Reliance
Industries shares at Rs.850/- upon expiry but only if contract buyer wants him to
o For example if upon expiry Reliance is at Rs.820/- then contract buyer can demand
contract seller to buy Reliance at Rs.850/- from him
o This means contract buyer can enjoy the benefit of selling Reliance at Rs.850/- when
make sense for contract buyer to exercise his right and ask contract seller to buy
the shares from him at Rs.850/-. This is quite obvious since he can sell it at a higher
o A agreement of this sort where one obtains the right to sell the underlying asset
o Contract seller will be obligated to buy Reliance at Rs.850/- from contract buyer
because he has sold Reliance 850 Put Option to contract buyer
o The buyer of the put option is bearish about the underlying asset, while the seller of
o The buyer of the put option has the right to sell the underlying asset upon expiry at
o The seller of the put option is obligated (since he receives an upfront premium) to
buy the underlying asset at the strike price from the put option buyer if the buyer
5.2 – Building a case for a Put Option buyer
option better. We will first deal with the Put Option from the buyer’s perspective
and then proceed to understand the put option from the seller’s perspective.
2. 2 days ago Bank Nifty tested its resistance level of 18550 (resistance level
3. I consider 18550 as resistance since there is a price action zone at this level which is
well spaced in time (for people who are not familiar with the concept of resistance I
6. Hence in the backdrop of a technical resistance and lack of any key fundamental
7. As result of which traders may want to sell banks and buy something else which is
9. However shorting futures maybe a bit risky as the overall market is bullish, it is only
10. Under circumstances such as these employing an option is best, hence buying a Put
11. Remember when you buy a put option you benefit when the underlying goes down
Backed by this reasoning, I would prefer to buy the 18400 Put Option which is
trading at a premium of Rs.315/-. Remember to buy this 18400 Put option, I will
received by the 18400 Put option seller.
Of course buying the Put option is quite simple – the easiest way is to call your
broker and ask him to buy the Put option of a specific stock and strike and it will be
done for you in matter of a few seconds. Alternatively you can buy it yourself
buying and selling options via a trading terminal at a later stage.
concept behind IV. Intrinsic Value represents the value of money the buyer will
5.4 – P&L behavior of the Put Option buyer
the buyer of  Bank Nifty’s 18400 put option would make under the various possible
changes, the fact that I have paid Rs.315/- will remain unchanged. This is the cost
that I have incurred in order to buy the Bank Nifty 18400 Put Option. Let us keep
1. The objective behind buying a put option is to benefit from a falling price. As we can
1. Generalization 1 – Buyers of Put Options are profitable as and when the spot price
goes below the strike price. In other words buy a put option only when you are
1. Generalization 2 – A put option buyer experiences a loss when the spot price goes
of the premium the put option buyer has paid.
buyer. Note, I will take the liberty of skipping the explanation of a breakeven point
as an option buyer or seller would set up the option trade with an intention to hold
5.5 – Put option buyer’s P&L payoff
be able to observe the generalizations we have made on the Put option buyers P&L.
1. The Put option buyer experienced a loss only when the spot price goes above the
3. The Put Option buyer will experience an exponential gain as and when the spot
5. At the breakeven point (18085) the put option buyer neither makes money nor
point the put option buyer would start to make money.
1. Buy a Put Option when you are bearish about the prospects of the underlying. In
other words a Put option buyer is profitable only when the underlying declines in
4. The P&L of a Put Option buyer can be calculated as P&L = [Max (0, Strike Price –
5. The breakeven point for the put option buyer is calculated as Strike – Premium
Previously we understood that, an option seller and the buyer are like two sides of
the Put option buyer is bearish about the market, then clearly the put option seller
perspective of a put option seller.
The typical thought process for the Put Option Seller would be something like this –
2. 2 days ago Bank Nifty tested its resistance level at 18550 (resistance level is
3. 18550 is considered as resistance as there is a price action zone at this level which is
well spaced in time (for people who are not familiar with the concept of resistance I
5. Bank Nifty has attempted to crack the resistance level for the last 3 consecutive
7. A positive cue plus a move above the resistance will set Bank Nifty on the upward
You may have a question at this stage – If the outlook is bullish, why write (sell) a put
option and why not just buy a call option?
Well, the decision to either buy a call option or sell a put option really depends on
has a low premium then buying a call option makes sense, likewise if the put option
is trading at a very high premium then selling the put option (and therefore
(buying a call option or selling a put option) depends on the attractiveness of the
So, with these thoughts assume the trader decides to write (sell) the 18400 Put
for a Put Option seller and make a few generalizations.
6.2 – P&L behavior for the put option seller
Please do remember the calculation of the intrinsic value of the option remains the
same for both writing a put option as well as buying a put option. However the P&L
1. The objective behind selling a put option is to collect the premiums and benefit
1. Generalization 1 – Sellers of the Put Options are profitable as long as long as the
spot price remains at or higher than the strike price. In other words sell a put option
loss. Clearly there is no cap on how much loss the seller can experience here and it
1. Generalization 2 – A put option seller can potentially experience an unlimited loss
Further, the breakdown point for a Put Option seller can be defined as a point
where the Put Option seller starts making a loss after giving away all the premium
So as per this definition of the breakdown point, at 18085 the put option seller
6.3 – Put option seller’s Payoff
seller’s P&L. Please find below the same –
1. The Put option seller experiences a loss only when the spot price goes below the
2. The loss is theoretically unlimited (therefore the risk)
3. The Put Option seller will experience a profit (to the extent of premium received) as
5. At the breakdown point (18085) the put option seller neither makes money nor
below this point the put option seller starts to lose money.
selling. Over the last few chapters we have looked at both the call option and the
put option from both the buyer and sellers perspective. In the next chapter we will
1. You sell a Put option when you are bullish on a stock or when you believe the stock
2. When you are bullish on the underlying you can either buy the call option or sell a
4. The put option buyer and the seller have a symmetrically opposite P&L behavior
5. When you sell a put option you receive premium
6. Selling a put option requires you to deposit margin
7. When you sell a put option your profit is limited to the extent of the premium you
Call Option (buy) and Call option (sell) one below the other. If you look at the payoff
emphasis the fact that the risk-reward characteristics of an option buyer and seller
are opposite. The maximum loss of the call option buyer is the maximum profit of
the call option seller. Likewise the call option buyer has unlimited profit potential,
mirroring this the call option seller has maximum loss potential
2. We have placed the payoff of Call Option (buy) and Put Option (sell) next to each
the market is expected to go higher. In other words, do not buy a call option or do
not sell a put option when you sense there is a chance for the markets to go down.
3. Finally on the right, the pay off diagram of Put Option (sell) and the Put Option (buy)
maximum loss of the put option buyer is the maximum profit of the put option
seller. Likewise the put option buyer has unlimited profit potential, mirroring this
the put option seller has maximum loss potential
Bullish Call Option (Buy) Long Call Buy Futures or Buy Spot Pay
Flat or Bullish Put Option (Sell) Short Put Buy Futures or Buy Spot Receive
Flat or Bearish Call Option (Sell) Short Call Sell Futures Receive
Bearish Put Option (Buy) Long Put Sell Futures Pay
It is important for you to remember that when you buy an option, it is also called a
‘Long’ position. Going by that, buying a call option and buying a put option is called
Likewise whenever you sell an option it is called a ‘Short’ position. Going by that,
selling a call option and selling a put option is also called Short Call and Short Put
Now here is another important thing to note, you can buy an option under 2
1. You buy with an intention of creating a fresh option position
2. You buy with an intention to close an existing short position
The position is called ‘Long Option’ only if you are creating a fresh buy position. If
you are buying with and intention of closing an existing short position then it is
Similarly you can sell an option under 2 circumstances –
1. You sell with an intention of creating a fresh short position
2. You sell with an intention to close an existing long position
The position is called ‘Short Option’ only if you are creating a fresh sell (writing an
option) position. If you are selling with and intention of closing an existing long
7.2 – Option Buyer in a nutshell
both from the buyer’s and seller’s perspective. However I think it is best to reiterate
Buying an option (call or put) makes sense only when we expect the market to move
strongly in a certain direction. If fact, for the option buyer to be profitable the
6. The buyer of an option has limited risk, to the extent of premium paid. However he
7.2 – Option seller in a nutshell
The option sellers (call or put) are also called the option writers. The buyers and
sellers have exact opposite P&L experience. Selling an option makes sense when
you expect the market to remain flat or below the strike price (in case of calls) or
option sellers. This is because, for the option sellers to be profitable the market has
However for the option buyer to be profitable, the market has to move in a certain
direction. Clearly there are two favorable market conditions for the option seller
versus one favorable condition for the option buyer. But of course this in itself
should not be a reason to sell options.
Here are few key points you need to remember when it comes to selling options –
5. The seller of the option has unlimited risk but very limited profit potential (to the
means to say that the option writers earn small and steady returns by selling
assume you were a seller of the 190 call option intraday and you managed to
do hold options till expiry in certain cases. Generally speaking option sellers tend to
hold contracts till expiry rather than option buyers. This is because if you have
1. Buy a call option or sell a put option only when you expect the market to go up
2. Buy a put option or sell a call option only when you expect the market to go down
3. The buyer of an option has an unlimited profit potential and limited risk (to the
4. The seller of an option has an unlimited risk potential and limited reward (to the
The intrinsic value of an option is the money the option buyer makes from an
Option Type Strike Spot Formula Intrinsic Value Remarks
5. But we know the maximum loss for a call option buyer is limited to the extent of
as the premium price (LTP), bid –ask price, volumes, open interest etc for each of
Having understood the basics of the call and put options both from the buyers and
sellers perspective and also having understood the concept of ITM, OTM, and ATM I
1. The intrinsic value of an option is equivalent to the value of money the option buyer
This also made me realize, there is a remarkable similarity between a bollywood
Options Premiums, options Greeks, and the natural demand supply situation of the
buy an option. There are two Call options and you need to decide which one to buy.
Now the question is, which option will you buy?
different options. In this case clearly the trader would be better off buying Call
sense to either buy a call option or collect premium by selling a put option’.
move by 40 points, therefore it makes sense to buy an option which has a delta of
as this will help you setup systematic trades.
the spot price falls ( going from OTM to deep OTM) the option’s delta will remain at
along with a few clients. One of our associates had taken a huge risk few days prior
1. Why do you think our associate choose to buy OTM options and not really ATM or
delta here is close to 0. The delta will remain close to 0 even when the option moves
Recommendation – avoid buying deep OTM options because the deltas are really
selling deep OTM makes sense, but we will evaluate when to sell these options
to ATM. This is where the maximum bang for the buck lies, and therefore the risk.
fact this is exactly how option traders double or triple their money i.e. by buying
Recommendation – Buying slightly OTM option is more expensive than buying
Whenever you buy options, consider buying slightly OTM options (of course
the option premium changes. However buying ATM options are more expensive
Recommendation – Buy ATM options when you want to play safe. The ATM option
do not attempt to sell an ATM option unless you are very sure about what you are
premium. This means to say when you buy a deep ITM option it is as good as
buying the underlying itself. This is because whatever is the change in the
Recommendation – Buy the ITM options when you want to play very safe. When I
in the underlying. Hence you are better off buying a Deep ITM option and therefore
make sure that the Deep ITM option continues to remain Deep ITM (in other words
8. Buying options in the take off stage tends to give high % return
9. Buying Deep ITM option is as good as buying the underlying.
Now, assume I buy 1 ATM option which has a delta of 0.5, then we know that for
1 8000 CE ITM 1 -Buy 0.7 + 1 * 0.7 = + 0.7
2 8120 CE ATM 1 -Buy 0.5 + 1 * 0.5 = + 0.5
3 8300 CE Deep OTM 1- Buy 0.05 + 1 * 0.05 = + 0.05
1 8000 CE ITM 1- Buy 0.7 + 1*0.7 =0.7
2 8300 PE Deep ITM 1- Buy – 1.0 + 1*-1.0 = -1.0
3 8120 CE ATM 1- Buy 0.5 + 1*0.5 = 0.5
4 8300 CE Deep OTM 1- Buy 0.05 + 1*0.05 = 0.05
1 8000 CE ITM 1- Buy 0.7 + 1 * 0.7 = + 0.7
2 8300 PE Deep ITM 2- Buy -1 + 2 * (-1.0) = -2.0
3 8120 CE ATM 1- Buy 0.5 + 1 * 0.5 = + 0.5
4 8300 CE Deep OTM 1- Buy 0.05 + 1 * 0.05 = + 0.05
1 8100 CE ATM 1- Buy 0.5 + 1 * 0.5 = + 0.5
2 8100 PE ATM 1- Buy -0.5 + 1 * (-0.5) = -0.5
1 8100 CE ATM 1- Sell 0.5 – 1 * 0.5 =  – 0.5
2 8100 PE ATM 1- Buy -0.5 + 1 * (-0.5) = – 0.5
Let me explain – when a trader buys an option (irrespective of Calls or Puts), what is
that he aspires? For example what do you expect when you buy Nifty 8000 PE when
3. There are two day left for expiry – would you buy this option?
case against buying this option becomes stronger!
A prudent trader would never buy this option. However don’t you think it makes
perfect sense to sell this option and pocket the premium? Think about it – there is
seller, one should go ahead and take the trade with conviction!
We can convert 4/5 to KMPH by making a simple mathematical adjustment –
When you want to buy a new car, the first thing the sales guy tells you is something
salesman is selling you this car, he would say the car can accelerate 0 to 72kmph in
measured using the application of “Derivatives” as a mathematical concept, hence
it traverses between 0 and 1 or maybe from 1 to 0 as the situation would demand.
discussion of Speed, unless you are mathematically inclined or you work for an
Investment Bank where the trading book risk can run into several $ Millions.
13.2 – Estimating Risk using Gamma
I know there are many traders who define their risk limits while trading. Here is
what I mean by a risk limit – for example the trader may have a capital of
exceed holding more than 5 Nifty Futures contracts, thus defining his risk limits,
way to think about risk while trading options.
his risk boundary. Recall the discussion we had in the Delta chapter about adding
So from the overall delta perspective the trader is within his risk boundary of
that he is holding 10 lots of options which is within his risk appetite…
Do you see the problem here? Although the trader has defined his risk limit of 5
lots, thanks to a high Gamma value, he has overshot his risk limit and now holds
positions equivalent to 8.5 lots, way beyond his perceived risk limit. An
impression that he is well under his risk radar. But in reality his risk exposure is
riskier way beyond what the plain eyes can see. Perhaps this is the reason why they
say – shorting options carry huge amount of risk. In fact you can be more precise
and say “shorting options carries the risk of being short gamma”.
successful trader employs both short and long positions as the situation demands.
or decrease? Hence would you be a buyer or a seller in that option?
3. If you plan to buy an option – is there a realistic chance for the premium to
4. If you plan to short an option – is it really safe to do so? Are you able to see risk
3. Large Gamma can translate to large gamma risk (directional risk)
4. When you buy options (Calls or Puts) you are long Gamma
following situation – Nifty Spot is 8500, you buy a Nifty 8700 Call option – what is the
point in the back of your mind as we now shift our focus on the ‘Option Seller’. We
know an option seller sells/writes an option and receives the premium for it. When
he sells an option he is very well aware that he carries an unlimited risk and limited
reward potential. The reward is limited to the extent of the premium he receives. He
gets to keep his reward (premium) fully only if the option expires worthless. Now,
think about this – if he is selling an option early in the month he very clearly knows
1. He knows he carries unlimited risk and limited reward potential
2. He also knows that by virtue of time, there is a chance for the option he is selling to
transition into ITM option, which means he will not get to retain his reward
towards the expiry date). Given this, an option seller would not want to sell options
at all right? After all why would you want to sell options when you very well know
that simply because of time there is scope for the option you are selling to expire in
the money. Clearly time in the option sellers context acts as a risk. Now, what if the
option buyer in order to entice the option seller to sell options offers to compensate
for the ‘time risk’ that he (option seller) assumes? In such a case it probably makes
sense to evaluate the time risk versus the compensation and take a call right? In fact
This means the option buyers will pay lesser and lesser towards time value. So if the
option buyer pays Rs.10 as the time value today, tomorrow he would probably pay
is expressed in points lost per day when all other conditions remain the same. Time
constant). A long option (option buyer) will always have a negative theta meaning all
else equal, the option buyer will lose money on a day by day basis. A short option
(option seller) will have a positive theta. Theta is a friendly Greek to the option seller.
Remember the objective of the option seller is to retain the premium. Given that
options loses value on a daily basis, the option seller can benefit by retaining the
to trade at – =0.75 * 3 = 2.25 = 54 – 2.25 = 51.75 Hence the seller can choose to close
the option position on T+ 3 day by buying it back at Rs.51.75/- and profiting Rs.2.25
So if you are selling options at the start of the series – you have the advantage of
the fall in premium happens at a low rate. You can sell options closer to the expiry –
advantageous to the options seller. Theta is a relatively straightforward and easy
1. Option sellers are always compensated for the time risk
5. Theta is a friendly Greek to option sellers
amount of variation or dispersion of a set of data values”.
Billy for the 7th match can be risky.
consistent and less risky compared to Mike.
So in principal, we assessed the riskiness of these players by using “Standard
Deviation”. Hence ‘Standard Deviation’ must represent ‘Risk’. In the stock market
world, we define ‘Volatility’ as the riskiness of the stock or an index. Volatility is a %
measure of the dispersion of returns for a given security or market index. Volatility can
respectively, then clearly Infosys has less risky price movements when compared to
likely to expire worthless, meaning we could sell them today and pocket the
3. Volatility is a measure of risk
7. Larger the range of a stock, higher is its volatility aka risk.
can be used to evaluate ‘Risk or Volatility’ of a stock. Before we move any further on
1. Standard Deviation represents volatility, which in turn represents risk
reference value. The way the data is spread out (dispersion as it is called) is
dispersion.     For sake of this discussion, let us take up the case of Nifty and do
3. In a normal distribution the data is centered around the mean and the dispersion is
o You can sell all call options above 8818 and collect the premiums because they are
o You can sell all put options below 8214 and collect the premiums because they are
Alternatively if you were thinking of buying Call options above 8818 or Put options
to select these strikes is simple – I see an acceptable balance between risk (1 SD
away) and reward (7.45 or 4.85 per lot).
o Visibility on risk and reward – both should be quantifiable
money do I deploy to this trade? Do I risk all my capital or only a certain %? If it’s a %,
diversify capital across multiple asset classes.
o 35% of my money is invested in equity based mutual funds via SIP (systematic
o Momentum based swing trades (futures)
above suits my risk reward temperament, which could be very different from yours.
I would suggest you note these points, understand your own risk-reward
you will not take any further losses. For example, if you buy Nifty futures at 8300,
you may identify 8200 as your stop-loss level; you will be risking 100 points on this
if you are to buy a stock at Rs.500, then your stop-loss price is Rs.490 and you risk
the low of the previous day (also coinciding with a support) as the stoploss. The
target would be the immediate resistance – both S&R points are marked with a blue
o Risk = 395 – 385 = 10 or about 2.5% below entry price
o Reward = 417 – 385 = 32 or about 8.1% above entry price
o Reward to Risk Ratio = 32/10 = 3.2 meaning for every 1 point risk, the expected
This sounds like a good trade from a risk to reward perspective. In fact I personally
consider any short term trade that has a Reward to Risk Ratio of 1.5 as a good trade.
prices. There is a very good chance that the trader places a premature stop-loss,
be factoring in the noise component and in turn placing a more relevant stop loss.
who understand the business of cinema very well. Some of these analysts are
Now clearly having a mathematical/statistical model to predict volatility is much
over the remaining life of an option. Implied volatility is reflected in the price of the
mathematical formula, here is a whitepaper which explains how India VIX is
proceeded to understand the Call and Put options from both the buyer and sellers
be trading cheap. One can consider designing a trade so as to buy this put option.
o Large Gamma can translate to large gamma risk (directional risk)
o When you buy options (Calls or Puts) you are long Gamma
question however is, how do we ensure the gamma is likely to remain low
to expiry. Irrespective of the time to expiry, the behavior of gamma remains the
o The gamma values for all three strikes (ATM, OTM, ITM) remain fairly constant till
Hopefully the animated version of the surface plot gives you a sense of how gamma,
Robert C Merton developed the model and brought in a full mathematical
Economic Sciences. The B&S options pricing model involves mathematical concepts
2. The pricing model churns out the required mathematical calculation and gives out a
The illustration below gives the schema of a typical options calculator:
Interest Rate – This is risk free rate prevailing in the economy. Use the RBI 91 day
discuss  ‘Put Call Parity’ (PCP). PCP is a simple mathematical equation which states –
you read through this – http://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/dcf-primer/ (section
mathematical terms, strike K is getting discounted continuously at rate of ‘r’ over
3. The interest rate in the B&S calculator refers to the risk free rate as available on the
1. You buy a Call option when you expect the underlying price to increase (you are out
2. You sell a Call option when you expect the underlying price not to increase (you
3. You buy a Put option when you expect the underlying price to decrease (you are out
4. You sell a Put option when you expect the underlying price not to decrease (you
We know that one needs to buy a Call Option when he/she expects the underlying
expected to go up by a certain percent, given this would you buy a Call option if –
These questions clearly demonstrate the fact that buying a call option (or put
required before you buy an option. The ground work mainly revolves around
Would you buy an ATM option or ITM option? Given the fact that Nifty will move up
can incorporate while buying/selling call options
2. For volatility to work in favor of a long call option one should time buying a call
option when volatility is expected to increase and avoid buying call option when
3. For volatility to work in favor of a short call option, one should time selling a call
option when volatility is expected to fall and avoid selling a call option when the
These conclusions make one thing clear – buy options when you expect volatility to
obvious question is – which strike to choose when you decide to buy or sell options?
the underlying prices. Clearly buying a call option makes sense. However the more
important aspect is to identify the right strike to buy. Infact when you wish to buy an
are bullish on the results. You want to buy a call option with an intention of squaring
target to be achieved quickly (say over few days) buy OTM options. In fact I would
suggest you buy 2 or 3 strikes away from ATM and not beyond that.
achieved) everything else remains the same. Notice how the profitability changes,
clearly buying far OTM option does not makes sense. In fact you may even lose
money when you buy these OTM options (look at the profitability of 5500 strike).
to be achieved over 15 days, it makes sense to buy ATM or slightly OTM options. I
would not recommend buying options that are more than 1 strike away from ATM.
One should certainly avoid buying far OTM options.
target expectation (4% move) remains the same but the target time frame is
execution. Clearly as we can see OTM options are not worth buying. In most of the
Also, at this stage I have to mention this – people end up buying OTM options simply
target to be achieved over 25 days, it makes sense to buy ITM options. One should
certainly avoid buying ATM or OTM options.
money. Traders should avoid buying ATM or OTM options.
trade initiation. News driven option trade such as buying an option owing to a
corporate announcement is a classic example. Buying an index option based on the
of time to expiry) buy far OTM options. I would suggest you buy 2 or 3 strikes away
from ATM options and not beyond that. There is no point buying ITM or ATM
above case (chart 1) the target is expected to be achieved in 1 day therefore buying
the impact of theta is higher. Hence it just does not make sense risking with far OTM
be achieved around 5 days from the time of trade execution buy strikes that are
slightly OTM. I would suggest you buy 1 strike away from ATM options and not
While the discussions we have had so far are with respect to buying a call option,
help us understand which strikes to buy under various situations –
best practices for buying options –
So the next time you intend to buy a naked Call or Put option, make sure you map
which strikes to avoid buying.
1. Volatility plays a crucial role in your decision to buy options
2. In general buy options when you expect the volatility to go higher
3. Sell options when you expect the volatility to decrease
Varsity readers over the last 2 months. I believe these are trades inspired by reading
through the contents of Zerodha Varsity, or at least this is what I was told.
Clearly the stock has been in a good up trend. However he believed the rally would
1. Shorting futures would be risky, especially in this case as reversals could be sharp
high on CEAT indicates that the uptrend is still intact, and therefore my contrarian
1. Since the stock is in a good up trend, the idea is to book profits as soon as it’s
fact it would not be a bad idea to reverse the trade and buy a call option.
Given this belief I would prefer selling call options instead of buying them. Why
making it attractive to option sellers
3. I would have executed the trade (selling calls) in the 2nd half of the series to benefit
on risk and reward. However the only time when I initiate a naked long call option
1. Stock should have rallied (prior trend) at least 5-10%
2. Should have started correcting (3% or so) on low volumes – indicates profit booking
I find this a good setup to buy call options.
The trade was executed by a Varsity reader from Delhi. I considered this trade
http://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/key-events-and-their-impact-on-markets/
give me an opportunity to buyback both the options at a lower price
5. What is you stop loss for this trade?
opposite trade i.e buy both Call and Put option before major events. This strategy is
For this reasons I believe selling options before an event to be more meaningful.
buy it back when the volatility cools off. The trade was well planned and the position
He decided to buy Infosys’s 1100 CE at 18.9/- which was slightly OTM. He planned to
hold the trade till the 1100 strike transforms to ITM. He was prepared to risk Rs.8.9/-
trader could have risked with slightly more OTM options.
“To buy and bet on a lottery ticket – a game that you typically avoid because you
ticket, you will be most likely tempted to buy a lottery ticket regularly thereafter!
lottery you feel the need to indulge. That is, your brain compels you to buy a lottery
brain helps you feel and is more intuitive. When you feel an urge to buy a lottery ticket,
Now consider trading in equity options. You know that buying calls and puts has its risk,
as options often expire worthless. Yet we may choose to buy them regularly, especially if
options carry the risk of losing capital when our view on the underlying stock or the
Traders buy options (month after month) with a hope they would double their
“limited risk, unlimited profit potential” is a silent P&L killer. Newbie traders are
Technical Perspective – The stock that you are tracking has been in the down trend
and also near a multi-year support. Given all this there is a high probability that the
and done the stock is still in a downtrend.
1. Buy 1 ATM call option (leg 1)
2. Sell 1 OTM call option (leg 2)
1. Buy 7800 CE by paying 79 towards the premium. Since money is going out of my
2. Sell 7900 CE and receive 25 as premium. Since I receive money, this is a credit
bull call spread versus buying a plain vanilla call option. Well, the main reason is the
Do remember your outlook is ‘moderately bullish’. Given this buying an OTM option is
ruled out. If you were to buy the ATM option you would have to pay Rs.79 as the option
Remarks Considering the outlook is moderately bullish,
skewing the risk (69 pts) to reward (31 pts) ratio.
Remarks Risk reward is better, but the breakeven is higher
Remarks Risk reward is attractive, but the breakeven is higher
So the point is that, the risk reward changes based on the strikes that you choose.
However don’t just let the risk reward dictate the strikes that you choose. Do note you
can create a bull call spread with 2 options, for example - buy 2 ATM options and sell 2
4. Classic bull call spread involves buying ATM option and selling OTM option – all
6. The risk reward gets skewed based on the strikes you choose
1. Buy 1 OTM Put option (leg 1)
2. Sell 1 ITM Put option (leg 2)
1. Buy 7700 PE by paying Rs.72/- as premium; do note this is an OTM option. Since
2. Sell 7900 PE and receive Rs.163/- as premium, do note this is an ITM option. Since I
Premium received from selling 7900PE - Intrinsic value of  7900 PE – Premium lost on
are the larger the spread, the larger the spread the larger is possible reward.
create), the risk reward ratio changes. In general, if you have a high conviction on a
4. The Bull Put strategy involves simultaneously buying a OTM Put option and selling a
profit. I suppose this should also explain why the call ratio spread is better than buying a
The Call Ratio Back Spread is a 3 leg option strategy as it involves buying two
OTM call option and selling one ITM Call option. This is the classic 2:1 combo. In fact
1. Sell one lot of 7600 CE (ITM)
2. Buy two lots of 7800 CE (OTM)
Notice how the payoff remains flat even when the market goes down, the maximum loss
profitable wherein you would sell 7800 CE and buy 2 8100 CE. Do note - even though
wherein you would sell 7800 CE and buy 2 8100 CE.
sell slightly ITM option and buy slightly OTM option when there is ample time to
2. The strategy requires you to sell 1 ITM CE and buy 2 OTM CE, and this is to be executed
In a Bear Call Ladder, the cost of purchasing call options is financed by selling an ‘in the
slightly in terms of the risk structure.
legs creates a classic “spread” wherein we sell ITM and buy ATM. Hence the spread could
3. The Bear Call Ladder is executed by selling 1 ITM CE, buying 1 ATM CE, and 1 OTM CE
an opportunity to buy goods/asset in a cheaper market and sell the same in expensive
risk free. Let me attempt to give you a simple example of an arbitrage opportunity.
which is 125 kms away has a huge demand for the same fresh sea fish. However, in this
Given this if you can manage to buy the fish from your city at Rs.100 and manage to sell
It looks perfect, think about it - if you can do this everyday i.e buy fish from your city at
Rs.100 and sell in the neighboring city at Rs.150, adjust Rs.20 towards expenses then
Rs.30 per KG is guaranteed risk free profit.
This is indeed risk free, provides nothing changes. But if things change, so will your
1. No Fish (opportunity risk) – Assume one day you go to the market to buy fish at
2. No Buyers (liquidity risk) – You buy the fish at Rs.100 and go to the neighboring
town to sell the same at Rs.150, but you realize that there are no buyers. You are left
3. Bad bargaining (execution risk) – The entire arbitrage opportunity hinges upon the
fact that you can ‘always’ bargain to buy at Rs.100 and sell at Rs.150. What if on a bad
day you happen to buy at 110 and sell at 140? You still have to pay 20 for transport, this
risk free Rs.30. Now imagine this –
a. So far you are the only one doing this trade i.e buy fish at Rs.100 and sell at
b. Your friend notices you are making a risk free profit, and he now wants to copy
c. Both of you buy at Rs.100, transport it at Rs.20, and attempt to sell it in the
d. A potential buyer walks in, sees there is a new seller, selling the same quality of
fish. Who between the two of you is likely to sell the fish to the buyer?
e. Clearly given the fish is of the same quality the buyer will buy it from the one
selling the fish at a cheaper rate. Assume you want to acquire the client, and
f. Next day your friend also drops the price, and offers to sell fish at Rs.140 per KG,
g. How low can the price drop? Obviously it can drop to Rs.120 (cost of buying fish
define any arbitrage opportunity in terms of a simple mathematical expression, for
example with respect to the fish example, here is the mathematical equation –
[Cost of selling fish in town B - Cost of buying fish in town A] = 20
are quite a favorite with risk intolerant traders.
3. Simultaneously buying ATM call and selling ATM Put creates a synthetic long
on risk. Professional traders value ‘risk visibility’ more than the profits. In simple words,
A conservative trader (read as risk averse trader) would implement Bear Put Spread
1. Buying an In the money Put option
2. Selling an Out of the Money Put option
the money. The ‘Bear Put Spread’ would require one to sell 7400 PE, the premium
1. Spread offers visibility on risk but at the same time shrinks the reward
1. Buy 1 OTM Call option (leg 1)
2. Sell 1 ITM Call option (leg 2)
1. Buy 7400 CE by paying Rs.38/- as premium; do note this is an OTM option.
2. Sell 7100 CE and receive Rs.136/- as premium, do note this is an ITM option.
I suppose this should also explain why the put ratio back spread is better than buying a
The Put Ratio Back Spread is a 3 leg option strategy as it involves buying two
OTM Put options and selling one ITM Put option. This is the classic 2:1 combo. In
1. Sell one lot of 7500 PE (ITM)
2. Buy two lots of 7200 PE (OTM)
2. The strategy requires you to sell 1 ITM PE and buy 2 OTM PE, and this is to be
In summary, you buy calls and puts, each leg has a limited down side, hence the
combined premium required to buy both call and put options. So at 15% volatility it
you are to buy ATM call and put options just around the corner of an event, then you are
essentially buying options when the volatility is high. When events are announced and
3. Long straddle requires you to simultaneously buy the ATM Call and Put option.
4. By buying the CE and PE – the trader is placing the bet on either direction
Setting up a short straddle is quite straight forward – as opposed to buying the ATM Call
and Put options (like in long straddle) you just have to sell the ATM Call and Put option.
Obviously the short strategy is set up for a net credit, as when you sell the ATM options,
So the short straddle will require us to sell both these options and collect the net
2. The strategy remains profitable only between the lower and higher breakdown
– news drives volatility up, so short options with an expectation that you can buy it back
obviously delta neutral. But as the markets move, will your position still remain delta
1. Short straddle requires you to simultaneously Sell the ATM Call and Put option.
2. By selling the CE and PE – the trader is placing the bet that the market wont
were to set up the long straddle here, you would be required to buy the 5900 CE and
In a straddle you are required to buy call and put options of the ATM strike. However
the strangle requires you to buy OTM call and put options. Remember when compared
Nifty is trading at 7921, to set up a strangle we need to buy OTM Call and Put options.
Same ratio here means – one should buy the same number of call option as that of put
be 5:5, meaning buy 5 lots of call and 5 lots of put option. Something like 2:3 is not
considered strangle (or straddle) as in this case you would be buying 2 lots of call
Going back to the example, considering Nifty is at 5921, we need to buy OTM Call and
Put options. I’d prefer to buy strikes which are 200 points either way (note, there is no
particular reason for choosing strikes 200 points away). So this would mean I would buy
sell OTM Call and Put options which are equidistant from the ATM strike. In fact you
example. Instead of buying these options, you would sell these OTM options to set up a
particular direction. However the strategy remains profitable between the lower and
write strangles in this backdrop make sure you watch closely for breakouts or
2. Strangles are delta neutral and is insulated against any directional risk
3. To set up a long strangle one needs to buy OTM Call and Put option
sell the OTM call and put option in a short strangle
In the never ending list of controversial market theories, the theory of ‘Option Pain’
this theory to suit my own risk appetite, and that yielded a decent result. Later in the
worthless, hence option writers/sellers tend to make money more often, more
consistently than the option buyers”.
1. At any point only one party can make money i.e either the option buyers or
option sellers, but not both. From the above statement, it is clear that the sellers
2. If option sellers tend to make maximum money, then it also means that the price
5. If such a group exists then it must be the option writers/sellers since it is believed
cause maximum amount of pain to option buyers).
wealth transfer between option buyers and sellers is a zero sum game. On option
maximum loss to option buyers. This specific price, calculated based on all outstanding
manipulation target by the option selling group”.
maximum pain is caused to option buyers. Therefore this is the price at which the
Both 7800 CE and 7900 CE seller would not lose money.
The 7700 and 7800 PE seller wouldn't lose money
amount of pain (read it as least amount of loss) to Option sellers.
So I eventually improvised on the classic option pain theory to suit my risk appetite.
the total traded value instead of OI, some even prefer to take the volumes. But I
consistently compared to option buyers.
ceived over 2000 questions! This number is besides the numerous emails received and queries
Keeping this in perspective, we are happy to introduce our new module on Zerodha Varsity aptly
as speculative business income, or about Section 44AD – we have it all on Zerodha Varsity – in
“If you buy shares with the intent of earning income through dividends you are an investor, and if
you buy and sell shares with the intent to profit, you are a trader”:) .
Assume you buy stocks or Mutual Funds today for Rs.50,000/- and sell the same after 365 days at
speaking, gain or profit earned by investing into stocks or equity mutual funds, and selling after 1
Assume you buy stocks or Mutual Funds today for Rs.50,000/- and sell the same within the com-
for more than 1 day (also called delivery based) and selling them within 1 year from date of pur-
Therefore, if you buy Infosys shares worth Rs 100,000/- today and sell the same 10 days later for
Trader: anyone who buys and sells with the intention of profiting from the price rise.
scrutiny (IT scrutiny is when the assessing income tax oﬀicer (AO) demands you to meet him and
vestments and claim exemption under the long term capital gain. If you are buying and selling
term gains under business income. But it is important to clearly demarcate your trading and in-
➡ Buying and selling stocks after taking delivery to your DEMAT account not frequently or
If the frequency of transactions (buy/sells) is high, it is best to consider them as trades and not in-
➡ What is considered high frequency of transactions (buy/sells)?
2. Shorter term equity delivery buy/sells can be considered as investments as long as fre-
quency of such buy/sells is low
3. Shorter term equity delivery buy/sells ideally has to be considered as trades (trading/
When you buy & sell (long trades) or sell & buy (short trades) stocks within a single trading day
Alternatively if you are buying stocks/equity and wait till it gets delivered to your DEMAT account
before selling it, then it is called ‘equity delivery based’ transactions.
It is NIL only if the transactions (buy/sells) are executed on recognized stock exchanges where
If the transactions (buy/sells) are executed through oﬀ-market transfer where shares are trans-
vestment to be considered as long term capital gain. If you sell the funds within 3 years to realize
It is 15% of the gain if the transactions (buy/sells) are executed on recognized stock exchanges
If the transactions (buy/sells) are executed via oﬀ-market transfer (where shares are transferred
2. A green arrow signifying holdings more than 365 days, selling which won’t attract any
when shares are transferred from one DEMAT to another through delivery instruction slips in-
charges, SEBI charges, stamp duty, service tax) that you pay when buying/selling shares on the
(STCG) or profit that will be earned by selling shares for an entire year just based on STCG earned
BTST (Buy today Sell tomorrow) or ATST (Acquire today sell tomorrow) is quite popular among eq-
uity traders. It is called BTST when you buy today and sell tomorrow without taking delivery of
➡ Nifty is at 8000, you buy 100 Nifty
➡ Buy side value = 8000 * 100 = Rs.800,000/-
➡ Sell side value = 8100 * 100 = Rs,810,000/-
➡ Turnover = Buy side value + Sell side value = 800,000 + 810,000 = 1,610,000/-
For all delivery based transactions, where you buy stocks and hold it more than 1 day and sell
shares at Rs 800 and sold them at Rs 820, the selling value of Rs 82000 (820 x 100) can be consid-
ences from trades is to be considered as a turnover. So if you buy 100 share of Reliance at 800 in
the morning and sell at 820 by afternoon, you make a profit or positive diﬀerence of Rs 2000, this
So if you buy 25 units or 1 lot of Nifty futures at 8000 and sell at 7900, Rs.2500 (25 x 100) the nega-
In options, if you buy 100 or 4 lots of Nifty 8200 calls at Rs.20 and sell at Rs.30. Firstly, the favor-
scrip for the financial year, find average buy/sell value, and then determine the turnover using the
Average Nifty Jan Fut buy: 200 Nifty Buy at 8050
Average Nifty Jan Fut sell: 200 Nifty Sell at 8075
100 Nifty Buy at 8000, Sell at 8100, Profit = Rs 10,000
100 Nifty Buy at 8100, Sell at 8050, Loss = Rs 5000
Average of Nifty Dec 8000 puts buy: 200 puts at 75
Average of Nifty Dec 8000 puts sell: 200 puts at 40
Total Selling value of options = 200 x Rs 40 = Rs 8000
Selling value of options =100 x Rs 50 = Rs 5000
Selling value of options = 100 x Rs 30 = Rs 3000
oﬀers trade wise turnover report. All brokers provide a P&L with an average buy/sell price, which
petitioned to the government through this campaign on Change.org, make sure to support it and
➡ Remaining mortgage balance (Loan Statement)
authorities when demanded in situations like assessment, inquiry, scrutiny etc. But in audit
1                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
2                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
complete awe. Needless to say, she was attracted to all the small li ttle stores selling
caterpillar, and she wanted me to buy her that. It looked really nice, and I was willing
to buy her that, until I saw the price! The wooden caterpillar had a 25 Euro price tag. I
thought I’d negotiate with her and buy her someth ing else.
3                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
4                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
someone selling cattle, assuming 2 bales for 1 cow, after the barter he’d be left with 2
5                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
However, here is a simplified version of the Bretton Woods System (BWS). The BWS was
6                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Internationally, the notional currency trading volume is massive and needs a moment
7                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
corporate maybe buying/selling USD to hedge their order book, and a traveller maybe
buying USD for his travel expense. While the trader maybe just speculating on the
quarters, the volumes are driven up. More so, Forex trading is highly leveraged, hence
8                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
3. By volumes, the currency markets are easily one of the largest
9                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Think about a stock, Infosys for example, when you buy or sell Infosys – your view on
buy or sell Infosys. Now think about a currency pair – say USD INR, when you buy  or sell
you buy USD INR; it implies you are bullish on the US Dollar and bearish on the Indian
In other words, this format tells us, how many units of quotation currency one can  buy
If you buy a currency pair, clearly it implies that you expect the value of the pair to go
up. Consider this example – USD INR = 65, one would buy the pair, hoping for the price
unit of base currency can buy more units of quotation currency i.e. 1 USD to buy more
10                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Similarly,  if you sell the USD INR pair, it implies that you anticipate the Base Currency
to buy lesser amount of quotation currency. This translates to you being bearish on
1. Base currency strengthens when it can  buy more units  of quotation currency . For
2. Quotation currency strengths when the base currency  buys lesser units of quotation
identify the rate at which one can buy and sell the currency (and currency pair).
11                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
The quo te gives you the rate at which you can buy and sell the currency pair.
For example,  if you want to buy the EUR/USD – you will have to buy the pair at the ‘Ask’
price i.e. 1.1270. When you buy the pair, technically you are long EUR and short USD.
Likewise,  if you want to sell the EUR/USD, then you would do so at 1.1269 (Bid price),
If you notice in the shortened version, the ‘bid’ price is stated in full, but only the last
12                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
2.2 – Rate fixing and conversion path
13                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
This means if I have to buy 1 USD, I need to pay INR 67.0740 and if I have to sell 1 USD,
14                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
This means I need USD 1.1140 (Ask price) to buy 1 Euro. In other words,  the cost of 1
INR, then I will have enough INR to buy 1 Euro and by doing so, I will also get the
Hence to buy 1 Euro I need 74.72400 I NR, or  EUR INR = 74.72400
15                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
16                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
International market which requires one to pay in USD. Therefore,  one has to sell INR
and buy USD to facilitate this purchase, which in turn causes a demand for USD and
sell the USD received and convert to INR. This causes the INR to strength.
17                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
18                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
when it can buy more units of quotation currency.
19                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
when it buys lesser units of the quotation currency.
20                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
21                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
22                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
5. There was a growing debate in UK in the recent tim es on whether the UK should remain
23                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
24                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
today’s conversion rate, a US dollar gets you 67 INR. Therefore $10,000 fetches Rest.
We convert this money to USD, assume the conversion rate is 67, we  get back $10,700.
So after repaying back $10,050 we get to retain $650, which if you realize is a risk free
live in, such easy risk free profits do not exist. Even if it did, it would vanish before even
25                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
5. Most importantly we assumed the conversion rate stayed flat at 67 after 1 year
This means the conversion rate shoul d be –
26                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
27                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
28                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
29                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
30                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
high of the Marubuzo as the stop loss.
31                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
32                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
33                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
34                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
35                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
36                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Now, if you were to buy this option, what would be the premium outlay? Well, this is
37                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
What if you were to sell/write this option instead? Well, you know that option selling
38                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
39                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
40                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
All one has to do is buy the future at 98, and simultaneously sell the spot at 100. We
can capture the spread by selling the futures and buying the spot.
41                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
To capture the spread, you are required to buy the July Futures and simultaneously sell
2. When the long leg rises and the short leg remains unchanged
5. When the long leg remains unchanged and short leg falls
I’d like to show you how easy it is to buy sell the spread from your trading terminal.
42                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
How would it be if you could directly buy or sell the spread? For example, in the above
two orders i.e. buy July Futures and sell August futures.
Executing these trades has some inefficiency mainly in terms of execution risk – by the
time you buy/sell both the contracts the prices could move and thereb y the spread may
Given this, it would be really convenient to buy the spreads directly and not really deal
43                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Spread (buy July, sell Aug) contract, then you essentially –
Buy July contract at the Ask Rate – 67.3100
Sell Aug contract at the Bid Rate – 67.6775
Buy August contract at Ask Rate – 67.6850
44                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Sell July contract at Bid Rate – 67.3075
Anyway, back to the main topic i.e. buying/selling the spread. Once the spread
watch and press F1 or F2 for buying and selling respectively.
This is what you see  upon invoking  the buy order window  –
45                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
46                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
47                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
48                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
not really on the daily prices (as they tend to trend).
49                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
2. In a calendar spread you simultaneously buy and sell contracts belonging to two
3. Future Bull spread is when you buy near month futures and sell the further
4. Futures bear spread is when you sell near month futu res and buy the further
50                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
51                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
52                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
53                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
INR pair. On the contract specification side of things, everything remains the same
54                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
55                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
other words, it costs Rs.66.2750 to buy 100 Japanese Yen. Since the lot size is 100,000
56                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
57                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
The following discussion can get a bit technical, and this is not meant for regular Varsity
Trend : This indicator measures the average change in USD INR on a month on month
There are two possibilities for components (level, trend, and seasonality)
58                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
This model indicates that weekly data has only level component and no trend
remaining price is contributed by seasonality.
59                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
60                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
61                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
the trade panned out well without triggering the stop loss.
62                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
63                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
64                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
65                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
66                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
67                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Now assume you buy 1 lot of Gold on MCX, this means you have to park close to 1.25
68                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
The big gold contract as you realize demands a heavy margin requirement in terms of
69                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
70                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
extrem ely tiny contracts which demand a very low margin, as low as Rs.1251 (Gold
71                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
7. Gold Petal and Guinea are other variants demanding much lower margin
72                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
73                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
submit their bids to buy and sell gold. From all the bids and offers an average price is
quotes on how much gold they would like to buy or sell at a given price, the rates are
74                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
75                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
uncertainties, well at least economic uncertainties, they are all in a hurry to buy gold.
76                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
time there is any sort of global/domestic uncertainty, investors flock to  buy gold. This
uncertainties, demand for risky assets such as equities goes down, and the demand for
Now besides the uncertain events, even on a day to day  basis, investors tend to buy
77                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
78                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
the other currency increases. With the increase in the currency value, the demand for
commodities including Gold tends to increase. As the demand for gold increases, the
79                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
its demand and supply. Demand and supply factors are many and complex, especially
for an international commodity such as Gold. However, the demand and supply
80                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
4. Prices have been trending up since early 2016.
but this does not mean that I will not short Gold. I would, if the risk to reward is enticing
looking for opportunities to buy gold at every dip; hence I will be quick to cover my
81                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
and v olume. The volume is almost non -existent, and the prices just tend to gap up and
82                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
this level, 30956 becomes an immediate resistance.
Considering all the above, I would be looking at buying opportunities in Gold, the
moment it cro sses the resistance level of 30956. Notice, this also coincides with the two
price of gold stays below the resistance level, I would hesitate to short for reasons we
 Reward to risk assuming I’m going long at 30956: 1.8
Not a bad trade from a reward to risk perspective I’d think. Also, since we are looking a
83                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
8. Demand & supply reflects in the current price, and also manifests itself in charts
84                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
for Varsity. I’ve been working on another high priority project which required my time
85                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
The correlation on an intraday basis is  0.7, which is quite remarkable. I’m guessi ng the
86                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
87                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
electronics industries. Hence, there is always a demand for silver. In fact,  the recent
demand stands at 1170.5 million ounces. Historically, the demand for silver has grown
at roughly 2.5% year on year. Out of the total global demand, bulk of it comes from
Here is the table which gives you the complete demand supply scenario in silver –
88                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Given how the supply and demand scenario plays out, there is a lot of scope to trade
89                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
90                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
91                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
92                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
93                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
94                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
95                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
96                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
97                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
need to sell per barrel of oil to cover the expense of producing the same, varies from
country to country. Naturally, selling oil below the breakeven point implies that the
98                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
countries to control the situation was to lower the supplies and regulate the demand
other non OPEC oil producing countries to cut the crude oil production to support the
growing at the same  pace as it used to, resulting in lower demand for international
99                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
4. Market Dynamics  – The above three points triggered a steep sell off in crude oil, adding
fire to this sell off was the heavy short positions built up on Crude Oil contracts.
100                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Well, this just depends on the supply -demand situation. Clearly as Saudi Prince Al -
Waleed Bin Talal says, “If the supply stays where it is and the demand continues to be
101                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Please note, unlike all the previous chapters on Varsity, this chapter will not have any
102                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
103                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
104                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
However, the price at which they can sell this oi l in the open market is not really in their
their efforts to extract oil remain the same, but margins improve drastically.
105                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
So, if the oil prices cool off, then it implies that the downstream companies can buy oil
106                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
107                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
108                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Supply -demand effects crude oil prices and therefore the profitability of many
109                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
increase when the demand is low or there is an oversupply, either which way, it is bad
either there is a lot of demand or there is a cut in production, b oth ways it’s good for
note that both these assets have their own supply demand dynamics influencing t heir
110                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
currency priced in dol lars, therefore irrespective of who is buying crude oil, payments
111                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
particular contract’s liquidity and volume.
2. Crude Oil Mini (the baby version)
112                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
113                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
The lot size is 100 barrels , which means to say that if you want to buy (or go long) on
114                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
115                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
116                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
117                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Except for lot size, and therefore the margins, the other remaining features don’t
118                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Risk free profit potential (arbitrage) = 3221 -3217 = 4 points
We know the r ule of thumb in any arbitrage trade – always buy the cheaper asset and
sell the expensive one. So in this case –
We buy the crude oil mini at 3217 and sell the crude oil at 3221. However, please note,
Given this, one should buy 10 lots of Crude oil mini at 3217 and sell 1 lot of crude oil at
119                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
120                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
involved buying of copper in spot market and physically storing them in its warehouses.
121                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
 Whenever traders or trading firms shorted copper, Hamanaka would buy. He could
buy because Sumitomo was cash rich and funded t hese trades.
 Invariably these traders would end up buying copper from Sumitomo at a premium,
load the contracts (especially since he was doing most of the buying)! He went to the
122                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
resulting drama. However, the key take away from this story is the importance of  risk
123                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
The demand – consumption of copper showcases similar trends as aluminium. Have a
124                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
In 2015, the global demand for refined copper was 24 million tons; half of this demand
was from China and Japan. The supply was higher than the demand (look at the last
version. Let me list down the contract specs of the big copper contract.
125                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
126                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
127                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
4. Aluminium is one me tal that has abundant supply and demand.
In fact, here is a snapshot which gives you the trends in production, supply, and aver age
3. The demand (yellow bar) on the other side matches  up to the global production
– this implies that there are no supply -demand disruptions.
4. In fact, the demand and the supply have remained more or less stable over the
must have heard about the global commodity glut. Clearly, the Chinese demand
128                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
6. The Indian demand on the other hand is better than  the global demand (in
percentage terms). Hindalco, in its annual report claims the demand for
aluminium in India is about 2 million tonnes. Much of this demand is met by
day, the volume could reach a little o ver INR 500 crores.   As you may have realized, the
129                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
The lot size is 5 MT (5000 kgs) , which means to say that if you  want to buy (or go long)
130                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
131                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
3. The demand -consumption of aluminium and copper seem to have some sort of
132                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
133                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
134                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
The supply demand of lead has more or less been stable over the last few years, have a
135                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
In fact, the price of lead has more or less remained range bound over these years. Have
136                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
137                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
138                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
139                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Here is the ‘demand – supply’ situation of Nickel –
As you can see, Nickel production has overtaken the  demand. This probably explains
140                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
141                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
142                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
143                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
4. ‘Demand supply’ has remained stable for Lead over the last few years
8. Nickel production has outstripped its demand.
144                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
145                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
146                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
147                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
148                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
149                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
producer and 1 st largest consumer of Cardamom, while Guatemala is the world’s largest
producer of Cardamom. The Cardamom produced by Guatemala is mainly for export.
Cardamom, is a Kharif crop, the demand supply dynamics mainly depends on –
4. Stock available at both India and Guatemala
The supply and demand for cardamom is kind of steady. Co incidentally, I read a news
150                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
151                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
152                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
153                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
154                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Cardamom, stands 2nd to Guatemala in production.
8. Demand supply for cardamom is quite stable.
155                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
156                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Millions of years ago, when plants and animals died, the remains were buried in sand
and silt. The buried remains mixed further with sand and silt, got buried deeper, and
157                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
158                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
159                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
8. This further triggered a panic sell leading to a single day fall of 20% Natural gas’s
be (yet again) the importance of risk management. Risk management sits above all and
Respect risk and risk respects you back, ignore it and it wi ll show you the corner.
For this reason, we will dedicate the whole of next module to Risk and trading
160                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
161                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
commodity, its spot price in India is also dependent on how the domestic demand and
162                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Onwards to Risk and Trading psychology!
163                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
164                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
couple of times bu t each time, it just remained a market rumor.
165                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
Just like futures, the options theory for commodities would remain the same. You have
166                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
compounded risk -free rate is treated. I will not get into the details at this  point. But do
be paid for option buying. A concept of devilment margin will come into play, I’ve
167                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
3. OTM and ITM – The definition remains the same as in Equity.
168                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
the time of buying the option, I would not park additional margin anticipating that the
169                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
before the expiry and the remaining half on the day of expiry of the options contract
to the account on 27 November and the remaining on 28 November
170                                                      zerodha.com/varsity
3 Risk (Part 2) – Variance & Covariance 10
4 Risk (Part 3) – Variance & Covariance Matrix 18
5 Risk (Part 4) – Correlation Matrix & Portfolio Variance 27
1                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
I’m excited about this brand new module on Varsity, wherein we will be discussing two
important and closely related market topics – ‘Risk Management and Trading Psychology’.
While risk management ma y seem straightforward, ‘psychology’ may sound boring. Trust me;
both these topics can potentially open up new realms of trading. Risk management, for
stop loss an d leverage. While trading psychology is a reflection of your actions in the markets
2                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Risk management techniques vary based on how you are positioned in the market. For
example, if you have a single position in the mar ket, then your approach to risk management
is very different compared to the risk management techniques of multiple positions, which is
again completely different compared to the risk management techniques of a portfolio.
Given this, we will look at risk m anagement from multiple angles –
1. Risk Management from a single trading position
2. Risk management from multiple trading positions
3. Risk management for a portfolio
4. Multiple position risk and hedging
6. Portfolio attributes and risk estimation
8. Asset allocation and its impact on risk (and returns)
I’m guessing these topics will give you a completely different perspective on risk and how
3                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
4                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
The difference between these two groups is their understanding of Risk and their techniques
Money management and associated topics largely involve assessment of risk. So in this sense,
understanding risk and its many forms become essential at this point. For th is reason, let us
break down risk to its elementary form to get a better understanding of risk.
The usual layman definition of risk in the context of the stock market is the ‘probability of
losing money’. When you transact in the markets, you are exposed t o risk, which means you
can (possibly) lose money. For example, when you buy the stock of a company, whether you
like it or not, you are exposed to risk. Further, at a very high level, risk can be broken down
into two types – Systematic Risk and Unsystemat ic Risk. You are automatically exposed to
both these categories  of risks when you own a stock.
All these represent a form of risk. In fact, there could be many other similar reasons and this
list can go on. However, if you notice, there i s one thing common to all these risks – they are
all risks specific to the company. For example, imagine you have an investable capital of
5                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
these risks are specific to this one c ompany alone and not its peers.
only b e attributable to company specific factors or internal factors. The risk of losing money
owing to company specific reasons (or internal reasons) is often termed as “Unsystematic
6                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Unsystematic risk can be diversified, meaning instead of investing al l the money in one
sectors). This is called ‘diversification’. When you diversify your investments, unsystematic
risk drastically reduces. Going back to the above examp le, imagine instead of buying HCL for
the entire capital, you decide to buy HCL for Rs.50,000/ - and maybe Karnataka Bank Limited
the unsystematic risk) the damage is only on half of the investment as the other half is
diversification, and therefor e lesser the unsystematic risk.
so that the unsystematic risk is completely diversified. Research has it that up to 21 stocks in
the portfolio will have t he required necessary diversification effect and anything beyond 21
stocks may not help much in diversification. I personally own about 15 stocks in my equity
The graph below should give you a fair sense  of how diversification works –
7                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
As you c an notice from the graph above, the unsystematic risk drastically reduces when you
diversify and add more stocks. However , after about 20 stocks, the unsystematic risk is not
really diversifiable, this is evident as the graph starts to flatten out after 20  stocks.  In fact,
the risk that remains even after diversification i s called the “Systematic Risk”.
Systematic risk is the risk that is common to all stocks in the markets. Systematic risk arises
geographical stability, monetary framework etc. A few specific systematic risks which can
The list, as usual,  can go on but I suppose you get a fair idea of what constitutes a systematic
risk. Systematic risk affects all stocks. Assuming, you have a well diversified 20 stocks
price of stocks across the board will decline. Systematic risk is inherent in the system and it
cannot really be diversified. Remember, ‘unsystematic risk’ can be diversified, but systematic
risk cannot be. However, systematic risk can be ‘hedged’ . Hedging is a craft, a technique one
would use to get rid of the systematic risk. Think of hedging as carrying an umbrella with you
diversification. Many market participants confuse diversification with hedging. They are two
different things. Remember, we diversify to minimise unsystematic risk and we h edge to
8                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
minimise systematic risk and notice I use the word ‘minimise’ – this is to emphasise the fact
Risk. It is natural for everyone to expect a return on the investments they make. The expected
9                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
1. When you buy a stock you are exposed to unsystematic and systematic risk
2. Unsystematic risk with respect t o a stock is the risk that exists within the company
3. Unsystematic risk affects only the stock and not its peers
4. Unsystematic risk can be mitigated by simple diversification
5. Systematic risk is the risk prevalent in the system
6. Systematic risk is common acros s all stock
7. One can hedge to mitigate systematic risk
8. No hedge is perfect – which means there is always an element of risk present while
10                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Risk (Part 2) – Variance & Covariance
the risk at a portfolio level. I’m hoping you are familiar with ‘Standard Deviation’ as a measure
of risk. We have discussed standard deviati on multiple times in the previous modules (refer
While we can eas ily measure the risk of a single stock by calculating its standard deviation,
calculating the risk of a portfolio is a whole different ball game. When you put a few individual
for this chapter is to help you understand how to estimate risk at a portfolio level.
11                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
In this case, the average return is +0.3%. We now need to calculate the dispersion of daily
return over its average return, and also square the dispersion.
Daily Return  Dispersion from avera ge Dispersion squared
12                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Daily Return  Dispersion from avera ge Dispersion squared
We now sum up the dispersion squared to get 0.0318000%. We divide this over 5 (N) to get
determine the riskiness of the investment. A large vari ance indicates that the stock could be
quite risky while a small variance can indicate lesser risk. In the above example, I would
are related to each other by the following simple mathematical relationship –
13                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
14                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
15                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
16                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
By the way, here is something very interesting fact. The mathematical equation for
kind of counter balances the portfolio and reduces the overall risk.
17                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
1. Variance measures the dispersion of returns over the expected average r eturns
2. Higher variance indicates higher risk, lower variance indicates lower risk
18                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Risk (Part 3) – Variance & Covariance Matrix
We started this module with a discussion on the two kinds of risk a market participant is
exposed to, when he or she purchases a stock – namely the systematic risk and the
unsystematic risk. Having understood the basic difference between thes e two types of risk,
we proceeded towards understanding  risk from a portfolio perspective . In our discussion
leading to portfolio risk or portfolio variance, we discussed two crucial concepts – variance
is to estimate the portfolio variance. Portfolio variance tells us the amount of risk one is
At this stage you should realize that we are focusing on risk from the entire portfolio
portfolio returns and risk. This will also include a quick take on the concept of ‘value at risk’.
Of course, we will also take a detailed look at risk from a trader’s perspective. How one can
identify trading risk and ways to mitigate the same.
19                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
well-diversified  (high convi ction) portfolio typically consists of about 10 -15 stocks. I’d have
20                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
21                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
22                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
23                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
24                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
25                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
26                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
27                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Risk (Part 4) – Correlation Matrix & Portfolio
28                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
The formula for calculating the correlation remains the same. Recall, from the previous
29                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
30                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
31                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
32                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
we need the portfolio variance to identify the extent of risk my portfolio is exposed to. With
33                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
34                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
35                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
36                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
in Varsity, I guess this one will be a very special one for me. Not because of the topic  that I
37                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
38                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
39                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
40                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
41                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
represents risk also called as Variance of the portfolio.
42                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
43                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
risk and return. These are topics which the high priests of finance prefer to keep for
44                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
The number gives you a sense of the degree of the risk associated with the  portfolio.
Risk or variance or volatility  is like a coin with two faces. Any price movement below our
entry price is called risk while at the sa me time, the same price movement above our entry
45                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
46                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
47                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
48                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
the stocks that we have selected have trended well. So quite obviously, the
49                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
50                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
We have spent a great deal of time and efforts towards understanding risk associated with a
51                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
52                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
vary. In fact, each return  has an associated risk profile, so it is prudent to state – as the
weights vary, both the risk and return characteristics vary.
o You identify the investment weights to achieve the least possible risk
results. When I say results, I’m tal king about the risk and return characteristics.   Each unique
and 7.8 % each across the remaining 9 stocks is another unique portfolio. The number of
combination possible are many and each combination of weights results in a unique risk and
53                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
the risk for the portfolio is the least possible. More technically, there should be combination
portfolio represents the least amount of risk you can take. So if you are a highly risk averse
a maximum return portfolio, the risk too will be on the higher side.
For a given level of risk or variance of a portfolio, you can create  at least two  unique
will yield the lowest return for the same given level of risk.
Here is an example on a completely arbitrary basis – let us say the risk or variance of a
return).  Do note, for both these portfolios, the risk is fixed to 15% but the returns vary.
return profile.    In super simple terms – for a fixed amount of risk, there could be multiple
54                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
55                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
56                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
57                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
58                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
59                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
60                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
61                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
these are the 5 stocks that you want to invest in, then the least amount of risk you w ill be
2. Minimum variance portfolio is that portfolio where the variance or risk is least
62                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
63                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
previous chapter, for every fixed risk level, there could be multiple unique portfolio with
and increase the risk maybe to 17%, and calculate the highest and lowest possible returns
the risk, we are essentially fixing the risk to certain desired level. 17% for now.
The general direction we are headed is this – we know the minimum risk possible for this
portfolio is 15.57%. We have also noted the return achievable at this level of risk i.e – 36.35%.
Like I mentioned earlier, we will now increase the risk a notch higher and note down the
maximum and minimum return f or this risk. Along with the return, we will also note the
investment weights. We will then increase the risk another notch higher and again note the
64                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Eventually, I would like to plot a scatter plot of fixed risk along with its respective max return
So let us get started by fixing the risk at 17%. Please note, I’ve opted 17% just like that, it
To begin with let us find out the maximum return one can achieve for a fixed 17% risk. For
65                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
66                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
solver that  we need to maximize the returns @ 17% risk, by varying the investment weights.
2. The Portfolio risk is fixed to 17%
67                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
risk, which is 17% in our case. Before we proceed, here is a table that I’m compiling of all the
various portfolios that we are building, along with its respective weights and risk return
We are now working on portfolio 3 (P3), which is the minimum risk possible for a fixed risk of
68                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Notice, while other variables remain the same, the objective is shifted to minimize from
given risk, we have now established two unique portfolios with different possible return
Just to recall – P1 is the minimum variance portfolio, P2 max risk @17%, and P3 is min risk at
69                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
As discussed earlier, we can now increase the risk a  notch higher to maybe 18%, 19%, and
21% and identify the maximum and minimum risk at both these risk levels. Remember, our
end objective is attain a scatter plot of the risk and return profile and study its characteristics.
I’ve gone ahead and optimized t he portfolios for all the risk points, and at each point, I’ve
If you notice, I’ve highlighted the risk and r eturn values of each portfolios. I’ll now go ahead
70                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
1. As you can see, the X -axis represents risk and the Y -axis represents returns
rest, represents the minimum variance portfolio. We know this portfolio has a risk of
3. We now move focus to 17% risk (notice the x axis), you can find two plots, one a t
1. It tells us that at 17% risk (or when we are particular about fixing the risk at 17%), the
3. In simple terms, when you fix a level of risk you are comfortable, you should aim to
(when we fix risk at 17%) these would be represented as plots b etween the minimum
have some clarity on how much risk you are willing to bear
4. You can notice the same behavior for risks at 18%, 19%m and 21%
71                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Think about it – when you risk your money, you obviously want the best possible return,
In the next chapter, we will take  a quick look at a concept called “Value at risk” and then
proceed to understanding risk from a trader’s perspective.
72                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
2. When we fix the desired level of risk, we can optimize the portfolio to yield the
3. Between the min a nd max return portfolio (for a given fixed level of risk), we can have
4. The scatter plot of risk and return gives us the efficient frontier
5. For a given level of risk, the best possible portfolio one can construct would lie on the
73                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
74                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
75                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
firm’s capability to assess risk.  Financ ial firms were evaluating the probability of a ‘firm -wide
Naturally, assessing risk at such level gets nothing short of a nightmarish task. However, this
to lose, if October 1987 were to repeat. The new breed of traders and risk mangers calling
themselves ‘Quants’, developed highly sophisticated mathematical models to monitor
positions and evaluate risk level on a real -time basis. These folks came in with doctorates
from different backgrounds – statisticians, physicist, mathematicians, and of course
traditional finance. Firms officially recognized ‘Risk manage ment’ as an important layer in
the system, and risk management teams were inducted in the ‘middle office’ segment, across
A one -page report which gave him a good sense of the combined risk at the firm -wide level.
‘The Risk Metrics Group’, which was later acquired by the MSCI group.
The report essentially contained what is called as the ‘Value at Risk’ (VaR), a metric which
The focus of this chapter is just that. We will discuss Value at Risk, for your portfolio.
76                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
At the core of Value at Risk (VaR) approach, lies the concept of normal distribution. We have
touched upon this topic several times acros s multiple modules in Varsity. For this reason, I
we are talking about. The Value at Risk concept that we are about to discuss is a ‘quick and
trust me it just works fine for a simple ‘buy and hold’ equity portfolio.
with so far and calculate its Value at Risk.
77                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
onto a separate sheet to calculate the Value at Risk for the portfolio. At this stage, the new
78                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
79                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
80                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
81                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
82                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
calculate the Value at Risk. From here on, the process is quite straightforward. To do this, we
83                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
I take the average of the remaining 5% of the observation, i.e the average of the last 6
lowest, we are essentially in a position to look at the returns in a more systematic way.
84                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
We have discussed quite a few things with respect to the portfolio and the risk associated
with it. We will now  proceed to understand risk with respect to trading positions.
3. Value at Risk is one approach to estimate the worst case loss if a black swan event
5. The average of the last 5% of the observation gives us the Value at Risk of the portfolio.
85                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
after a gap of 6 years and I was quite excited about it. The buy in for this friendly game was
86                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
to buy in again for another 1000 Rupees. This was my 3 rd buy in. In the trading world, this is
Anyway, back to my poker  game. This was my 3 rd buying, I had already lost 2K and was betting
87                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
result of this simple systematic approach had a great impact on my game –
concept of position sizing to traders. I’d even recommend y ou buy some of his books to
88                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
3. All time high implies no resistance points
4. Nifty has been in a great up wards trend over the past few weeks
justified or for that matter buying of puts. Your analysis could be as simple as this or as
89                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
only to see the stop loss trigger. You do not give up, you place another trade and to your
You know your analysis is bang on – but then your stop loss  is continuously getting triggered.
is rock solid and the markets will turn around, you still have an appetite for risk – given all
2. Would you risk the same amount of money again?
2. Would you risk the same amount again?
90                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Extending this thought – if you risk too much capital on any one trade, then you stand a
chance to risk your capital to an extent that you may burn your capital leaving you with very
appear to be too risky. The climb back to where you started will (in terms of capital) will be a
91                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
92                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
So what do you do? You tend to take bigger risks and hope to make bigger gains, and if the
This is exactly the reason why you should never risk too much on any one trade, especially if
enough capital, and to have enough capital, you need to risk the right amount of money on
93                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
most people employ is the standard 5% rule. The 5% rule does not permit you to risk more
will not risk more Rs.5000/ - on any single trade.
94                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
95                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
expose or risk more than 10% of your capital to a trade.  So the first trade gets an exposure
96                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
estimating equity makes it a little risky. I’m personally not a big fan of this equity estimation
97                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
I would now put in a trailing stop loss and lock in at least about 25 points out of 50 point  move
This means, for the long ACC position at 1800, I have to now place a stop loss at 1825 and
98                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
stop loss principles, which according to me is very good.
99                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
100                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
101                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
of any asset at any given point. Given this, assume you get a signal to buy Nifty, now since
there is 2L in the account, you can choose to buy one or 2 lots.
Consider this – the trading system that you follow generates a signal to buy Nifty Futures and
at the same time the system signals you to buy T ata Motors. Since you have 2L in your
account, you decide to buy 1 lot each. Do note at the point of writing this article, Nifty Futures
is assigning an equal weight to both the contracts, ignoring the implicit ‘riskiness’ of the
to a higher risk at the portfolio level.
a trade based on the riskiness and bad in the sense i t does not really factor in risk.
winning trades. Now, for each signal, the maximum number of lots you can buy is restricted
102                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
103                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
However, the volatility from each position could vary. You could end up with risky bets and
therefore altering the entire risk pro file of your account.
This exposure to risk is overcome by next position sizing model.
104                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Now assume I spot an opportunity to trade PEL, the question is how many share should I buy
Given this, I simply have to divide 10,000 by 76 to find out the number of shares that I can buy
105                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
to the next trade would reduce, but the exposure to volatility would remain the same.
4. Unit fixed model does not consider risk
106                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
technique, called the ‘Percentage Risk’, method. I do know quite a few traders who use this
107                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
The percentage risk method, relies upon your own assessment of ‘loss’ that you are willing
to bear for a given trade. This, as you may know is also called the ‘Stop loss’ for the trade.
The stop loss for a tra de is the price at which you decide to close the trade and take a hit. The
percentage risk technique controls the position size as a function of risk defined by stop loss.
same level, twice in the past. So this makes 393.65, a support price for Tata Motors (on an
108                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Also, do notice the low volume retracement between 400 to 393.65 – I’ve discussed why I like
What if the trade heads the other direction? What is the stop loss?
I notice so me sort of support at 390/ -, hence I’d be happy to set this as stop loss for the trade.
Reward to Risk: 1.7 (which is great for an intraday trade)
Technically speaking one can buy up to 6.8 or 6 lots –
109                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
However great a trade set up is, it is not a smart thing to expose so muc h capital to risk. As a
thumb rule, professional traders do not risk more than 1 to 3% of their capital on any single
trade, and this rule forms the core of the ‘Percentage risk’ position sizing technique.
Given this, let us define the  maximum risk  per tra de as a percentage of overall capital –
We know the stop loss for this trade is 390, from an entry price of 393.65, the stop loss in
In the event the stop loss is triggered I would be taking a hit of Rs.5475 per lot.
Now to identify the number of lots I could take for the risk I’m willing to bear, I simply have
110                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
Therefore, on this trade I can go ahead and buy up to 1 lot, which  will cost me Rs.73,500/ - as
Given this, for the next trade, I will work out the stop loss, multiply that with the lot size and
divide the max risk i.e 6397.5 by loss threshold to identify how many lots I can transact in.
111                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
I like trades like these, when the price does not even approach close to the stop loss J. As I
112                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
113                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
risk position sizing technique we discussed earlier in the chapter.
We defined the percentage risk as a technique wherein the  exposure to a trade is defined as
114                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
For a more Mathematical explanation on Kelly’s Criterion, I’d suggest you  watch this video ,
1. Percentage Risk is an easy and intuitive position sizing technique
2. One has to define the maximum amount of risk one as a percentage of capital, dividing
4. One can combine Kelly’s Criterion with percentage risk for optimal results
115                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
DEMAT form, the show host casually informs him the value of his shares in today’s terms.
116                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
The first thought that occurred to my mind was – how can someone have the vision to buy
temptation to not sell the stock? Especially after watching the stock grow multiple times over
A common investor according to me would probably sell his investment if he saw his
 The grandson has now decided to convert them to DEMAT
 I’m assuming that he would probably sell the shares as soon as it gets them converted
117                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
is a high probability of him selling out his investment – at say a return of 100%, 200% or even
4. Pivot points for support and resistance
118                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
statements like  ‘Go ahead and buy puts’, you question them why, and they will be quick to
say ‘Boss, I’m telling you just buy Puts’.
119                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
truthful to yourself (and others around you) and will always remain humble. If not for
120                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
still remains). When he asked me for my advice – I asked him to get out. He quickly pul led the
buying in the stock. Maybe, there were few traders/investors trying to bottom fish.
before selling, I could get a better price’.
121                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
122                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
123                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
I did my usual stock research and was convinced that the stock was a great buy. I’ve circled
the area around which I wanted to buy – roughly around 270 per stock. Given that it was a
bear market, I was kind of rigid on the price to buy – 270 or lower.
As you may have guessed, 270 never occurred and I never got to buy  this stock, and here is
124                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
the games my mind played with me. More formally, what really prevented me from buying
‘Cognitive Biases’. Cognitive bias i s a systematic error in our thinking that affects the way
buy order or a stop loss order because the price that you perceived as ‘right’ never occurred,
125                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
126                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
127                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
5. Since 370, the price has consistently trended up, all the way back to 430, which is
128                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
and therefore support your logic of buying the stock. However, in reality, the fundamental
subconscious level, you start looking for pieces of information that support your view. In
assimilate information that supports your view. Your brain some how does not allow you to
pay attention to information that does not support your original contention.
129                                                               zerodha.com/varsity
With this chapter, I’d like to close this module on Risk and Trading Psychology. As usual, I
information) which can support your original hypothesis
I   had   a   bunch   of   things   planned   with   my   first   pay.   Right   from   buying   my
the   remaining   50K   that   she   received   (from   28th   birthday   to   her   65th   birthday)
multiple   modules   in   Varsity,   but   for   the   sake   of   completeness   let   me   include
Let   Rs.20   in   profits   remain   invested   along   with   the   original   principal   of
years,   you   are   planning   to   buy   a   new   car.
We   all   buy   assets   with   a   hope   that   it   will   generate   a   decent   return   over
time.   For   example,   if   I   were   to   buy   a   piece   of   land   today   then   I   would
will   receive   when   I   sell   this   piece   of   land   in   15   years   will   have   a   very
and   held   it   for   15   years.   After   15   years,   you   sell   the   land   at
What   is   my   risk-free   opportunity   cost   today?
Given   the   risk-free   opportunity   cost,   what   is   the   amount   that   needs   to   be
deal.   The   opportunity   cost   can   be   found   out   by   figuring   out   the   risk-free
rate   in   the   economy   and   adding   a   risk   premium   over   and   above   the
Opportunity   cost   =   Risk   free   rate   +   Risk   premium
The   risk-free   rate   is   the   rate   at   which   our   money   can   grow   without   any
risk.   Of   course,   we   can   endlessly   argue   that   there   is   nothing   like   a   true
risk-free   rate,   but   for   the   sake   of   this   discussion,   let’s   assume   that   the
risk-free   rate   is   the   Government’s   15-year   bond.   Usually,   the
to   understand   that   the   risk-free   rate   for   the   next   15   years   is   7.5%.
To   figure   out   the   opportunity   cost,   we   can   add   a   risk   premium   of   1.5-2%
more.   The   risk   premium   really   depends   on   many   things,   keeping   it
Given   this,   if   someone   makes   an   offer   to   buy   the   property   at
we   are   trying   to   solve,   the   opportunity   cost   remains   the   same.
have   an   option   to   invest   this   money   and   grow   it   at   a   risk-free   rate.
a   foreign   university.   She   is   ten   years   today,   and   she   is   expected   to   go   to
comes   home   for   a   cup   of   tea   and   also   decides   to   sell   a   financial   product
● The   discount   rate   =   opportunity   cost   +   risk   premium
Your   risk-taking   ability,   and
The   risk-taking   ability   is   merely   a   function   of   your   knowledge   and   the   way   you
familiar   with   risk   and   the   better   equipped   you   are   to   handle   risk.   The   extent
of   risk   you   assume   can   make   or   break   your   financial   fortunes.   Of   course,   we
course   the   actual   amount   of   our   lifestyle   demands.
Some   of   the   things   are   oversimplified   and   exaggerated   here.   For   instance,
in   the   coolest   and   trendiest   bar   in   town.   Or   we   may   cut   down   on   all   the
outside   eating,   watching   movies,   etc.   We   may   not   want   to   buy   the   latest
looking   at   the   long-term   trends   and   by   developing   an   idea   on   their   future
So   as   you   can   see,   the   combined   (diversified)   portfolio   with   multi-assets,
somewhat   similar   diversification   plan.
corpus.   The   exposure   to   equity   is   in   the   form   of   making   systematic
If   you   do   not   understand   ‘systematic   investments   in   a   growth-oriented   equity
For   now,   we   will   rely   upon   investing   in   an   equity   mutual   fund,   in   a   systematic
But   remember,   this   entire   conversation   is   an   oversimplification   to   help   us   get
systematic   investment   plan.   Of   course,   there   are   many   other   variants   and
How   to   analyze   a   mutual   fund?   –   Risk,   return,   ratios,   exposure
Setting   long   term   return   and   risk   expectations
Logistics   –   SIP,   SWP,   STP,   CAS   statements,   DEMAT   vs   non-DEMAT   mode
for   each   investment   made.   I   was   aware   of   the   growth   drivers   and   the   risk
behalf,   grow   it,   review   it   periodically,   assess   the   risk,   and   do   everything
6. Measure   the   returns,   performance,   and   risk   at   periodical   intervals
bakery   to   buy   either   a   loaf   of   bread   or   a   pack   of   biscuit   baked   by   the   baker.
It   is   like   this,   you   can   buy   a   DSLR   camera,   turn   on   the   auto   mode   and   start
Once   the   in-principal   approval   is   issued,   SEBI   demands   more   documents   and
all   the   shares   that   the   mutual   fund   buys.   Think   of   the   custodian   as   the   safe
biryani   we   both   get   served   will   remain   the   same.   However,   since   you   are
to   hold   them   and   decide   when   to   sell   them.   While   you   do   this,   you   need   to
The   investment   objective   remains   the   same   across   all   the   investors
agree   we   oversimplified   the   previous   chapter,   but   that’s   ok   as   the   objective   at
capital   appreciation   from   a   diversified   portfolio   of   equity   &   equity-related
1. The   fund   manager   intends   to   have   a   diversified   portfolio;   therefore   it   is
distributor.   The   mutual   fund   distributor   is   like   the   middleman   between   the
AMC   and   the   investor.   If   a   mutual   fund   distributor   approaches   you   and   sells
you   a   mutual   fund,   then   he   is   selling   you   a   ‘regular   plan’,   which   means   he   is
entitled   to   receive   a   commission   from   the   AMC   for   selling   this   fund   to   you.
Direct   plan    –   Now   you   don’t   need   to   buy   the   fund   via   a   distributor.   If   you
know   which   fund   to   buy,   capable   of   doing   your   mutual   fund   research   (which
by   the   way   is   the   end   objective   of   this   module),   then   you   can   buy   that   fund
directly   from   the   AMC.   When   you   buy   directly   from   the   AMC,   then   there   is   no
Just   to   let   you   know,   when   you   buy   mutual   funds   via   Zerodha,   you   are   buying
Dividend   payout    –   Think   about   it,   when   you   buy   a   stock   of   a   company   and
receive   these   dividends   right?   Likewise,   when   the   fund   manager   buys   the
the   dividend   amount   and   buy   more   units   of   the   fund.   The   dividend   payout
Next   up   is   the   SIP   details.   SIP   stands   for   ‘systematic   investment   plan’.   In   a
Every   AMC   is   supposed   to   self-asses   the   riskiness   of   the   fund   and   lets   the
example,   a   small-cap   fund   should   not   be   packaged   as   a   low-risk   fund   and
Here   is   how   the   AMC   does   a   self-assessment   of   risk   –
The   needle   of   the   riskometer   points   to   ‘moderately   high’,   meaning   that   the
Kotak   Smallcap   fund   is   risky.   The   text   next   to   the   riskometer   reiterates   this.
Now,   agreed   this   is   a   risky   fund,   but   that   should   not   stop   you   from   investing
Remember,   the   antidote   for   ‘risk’   in   the   mutual   fund   world   is   ‘time’;   hence   the
● Riskometer   is   a   self-assessment   of   risk   by   the   AMC
category   (except   for   the   thematic,   index   fund,   and   fund   of   funds).   This
the   market,   and   they   all   diﬀer   in   their   risk   and   reward   characteristics.
However,   the   general   philosophy   of   investing   in   an   equity   scheme   remains
allocation   and   fund   diversification.
with   not   so   much   risk   to   his   capital.   Do   remember,   these   are   large-cap   stocks,
small-cap   fund.   The   risk   is   higher   than   a   large-cap   fund   but   lower   compared
involves   looking   at   various   parameters   on   risk,   returns,   performance,   and
In   the   next   chapter,   we   will   discuss   the   remaining   few   Equity   subcategories
stocks   from   the   entire   market   and   create   a   diversified   portfolio   (the
diversification   is   mainly   in   terms   of   market   capitalization).   In   a   sense,   the
Now,   given   the   fact   that   the   fund   is   diversified   across   the   diﬀerent   market
associated   with   a   higher   risk.   Here   is   a   summary   of   the   returns   from   Multi   cap
the   ‘fund   manager’   risk.   Since   the   fund   invests   in   stocks   across   the   spectrum,
risk   (and   of   course   the   return).
Since   the   number   of   stocks   is   limited   in   a   focused   fund,   the   risk   and   return
higher   return   along   with   higher   risk.
risk   profile   of   the   focused   funds.
because   the   focused   fund   will   be   a   lot   more   volatile   compared   to   a   diversified
take   that   extra   risk   with   growth   stocks.   Of   course,   the   decision   to   invest   or   not
● One   of   the   risks   to   watch   out   for   in   a   multi-cap   fund   is   the
● The   risk   and   return   of   a   focused   fund   is   higher   compared   to
So   let’s   get   started.   Assume   you   want   to   buy   an   apartment.
account.   The   apartment   will   remain   hypothecated   to   the   bank   till
the   bank   can   sell   your   apartment   and   make   good   their   principal   and
the   risk   involved   here.   By   risk,   I   mean   the   risk   involved   for   the   banker,   i.e.   the   lender.   What   do   you
Cashflow   risk    –   The   borrower   can   skip   paying   a   couple   of   EMIs   and
Default   risk    –   The   borrower   may   get   into   an   insolvent   situation
Interest   rate   risk    –   The   loan   is   given   out   at   a   specific   interest   rate.
Credit   rating   risk   –    The   bank   evaluates   the   borrower’s   credit   rating
the   chance   of   default   risk.
Asset   risk   –    In   case   the   borrower   defaults,   the   bank   has   the   right   to
sell   the   hypothecated   property.   What   if   the   property   itself   loses   its
These   are   the   most   common   risk   associated   with   a   debt   obligation.
The   risks   that   we   discussed   in   the   bank-apartment   example   applies
to   bonds   as   well.   Three   risks   matter   the   most   when   it   comes   to   the
risk   applicable   (very   briefly)   then   I   suppose   we   are   off   to   an
The   risk   associated   with   that   category   of   debt   fund
because   you   know   that   with   the   Government,   there   is   no   credit   risk.
fund.   The   lender   will   lend   if   he   is   compensated   for   credit   risk;   hence
credit   risk.   Hence   company   B   has   to   offer   something   like   10   of   11%.
The   credit   rating   reveals   the   credit   risk   of   a   company.   The   credit
SA/FD   account,   but   also   comes   with   a   certain   amount   of   risk.
suspectable   to   credit   risk.   Here   is   the   snapshot   of   HDFC’s   Liquid
consists   of   no   credit   risk,   thanks   to   the   implicit   sovereign   guarantee.
While   this   is   a   good   liquid   fund,   it   is   still   not   risk-free,   you   can   lose
Liquid   fund   is   not   risk-free,   you   can   lose   money   when   you   invest   in
Choose   a   fund   which   has   relatively   less   default   risk   –   meaning   the
● The   lender   faces   multiple   risks   when   lending   funds   to
● Credit   risk   and   interest   rate   risk   is   the   primary   risk   for
liquid   fund.   Do   recall;   the   liquid   fund   is   not   risk-free   as   most   people
assume,   it   is   susceptible   to   both   default   and   credit   rating   risk.   The
Taurus   MF   and   Ballarpur   example   highlighted   this   credit   risk   in   liquid
Both   these   risk   types   are   significantly   reduced   (not   eliminated)   in   an
debt   obligation,   the   chance   of   a   change   in   credit   rating   risk   is   low.
The   default   risk   still   exists,   although   it   is   small.
issues,   or   you   can   choose   to   buy   these   bonds   from   the   secondary
Think   of   this   as   buying   a   stock   at   the   IPO   or   buying   it   post   the   IPO
from   the   stock   exchanges.   Now,   the   moment   you   buy   it   from   the
demand   and   supply   dynamics   of   the   bond.
Fund   manager    B    buys   the   same   bond   from   the   secondary   market.
Fund   manager    C    buys   the   same   bond   from   the   secondary   market.
means   is   that   the   fund   can   buy   CPs   with   a   maturity   of   fewer   than
duration   funds   –   they   are   not   risk-free.   These   funds   too,   have   the
risk   of   credit   default   and   rating   downgrade.
12   years,   plus   they   are   ok   to   take   a   wee   bit   of   risk   on   the   parked
debt   funds   too   are   risky,   invest   in   them   only   after   you   fully
understand   the   risk   involved.
● Ultrashort   duration   funds   are   also   risky
to   learn   something   new   and   educated   themselves.   The   traﬀic   on   Varsity   has
Credit   risk   –   The   risk   that   the   bond   held   by   the   debt   fund   can   get   downgraded
Default   risk   –   The   risk   that   the   bond   issuer   defaults   on   a   coupon   or   principal
Of   course,   now   you   also   know   that   the   bond   price   has   an   interest   rate   risk,
The   credit   risk   of   the   low   duration   fund   is   similar   to   the   ultra-short   duration
zero   credit   risk.   Remember,   we   discussed   the   Vodafone   case   in   the   previous
While   the   credit   risk   exists,   the   interest   rate   risk   for   the   low   duration   fund   is
While   we   are   at   it,   which   of   the   two   low   duration   funds   do   you   think   is   risky   in
What   is   the   risk   of   investing   in   a   money   market   fund?
The   money   market   fund   is   exposed   to   credit   risk.   As   you   can   see,   9.39%   of   the
ratings   can   change.   So   yeah,   credit   risk   exists   in   a   money   market   fund.
money   market   fund,   which   implies   that   the   interest   rate   risk   for   these   funds   is
Well,   I   hope   you   think   about   it   from   a   risk   perspective.   With   an   increase   in   the
duration,   the   modified   duration   also   increases   –   which   means   the   risk
Of   course,   credit   risk   continues   for   short   duration   fund   as   well.   Have   a   look   at
the   interest   rate,   the   fund   will   drop   2.67%   in   its   NAV.   The   risk   associated   with
With   a   considerable   amount   of   risk,   you   need   to   be   clear   with   your
increased   risk,   the   return   expectation   is   also   higher.   I   think   it   is   prudent   to
What   do   you   this   is   the   credit   risk   here?
What   is   the   modified   duration?   What   do   you   think   is   the   risk   associated   with
In   the   next   chapter,   we   will   take   up   the   Credit   risk,   dynamic   bonds   and   the
or   interest   rate   risk.   Folks   at   Franklin   are   outstanding   in   the   debt   fund   game,
and   interest   rate   risk,   factor   in   a   new   risk   –   liquidity   risk.
But   of   course,   how   do   you   quantify   and   apply   liquidity   risk   in   a   real-life
● Low   duration   fund   has   credit   risk,   but   low-interest   rate   risk
● Money   market   fund   has   credit   risk,   but   low   interest   rate   risk
● Debt   investors   have   to   factor   in   liquidity   risk   along   with   credit
The   evaluation   must   be   based   on   risk   metrics.   Unless   the   investor   develops   a
sense   of   all   the   risk   involved   while   investing   in   a   debt   fund,   he   or   she   should
risk’,   investors   somehow   perceive   market   risk   as   a   risk   associated   (only)   with
If   you   have   read   the   previous   chapters,   you   know   that   debt   funds   are   risky
too,   and   you   are   even   familiar   with   the   risk   types   associated   with   debt   funds,
i.e.   default   risk,   credit   risk,   and   the   interest   rate   risk.   The   recent   Franklin
episode   formally   introduced   us   to   another   dormant   risk   factor   called   the
We   will   start   this   chapter   with   a   quick   discussion   on   liquidity   risk   and   then
Liquidity   risk,   from   the   debt   fund   perspective,   can   mean   two   things   –
papers   which   it   cannot   sell   as   and   when   they   wish   (lack   of   liquidity   in   bonds
We   will   discuss   more   on   this   and   other   aspects   of   risk   in   the   ‘how   to   select
types   of   debt   funds   –   Banking   &   PSU   Debt   Funds,   Credit   risk   funds,   and   the
The   remaining   20%   gets   invested   in   any   paper.
risk   is   kind   of   on   the   lower   side,   mainly   for   two   reasons   –
● RBI   provides   liquidity   support   to   banks   and   NBFCs
But   remember,   the   ‘credit   risk   comfort’   is   for   80%   of   the   portfolio;   the   same   is
14.3   –   Credit   Risk   Funds
Risk   Funds   were   called   ‘Credit   Opportunities   Fund’.
generally   has   a   positive   feel   to   it,   hence   easier   to   sell   🙂
Credit   Risk   Fund   –   It’s   the   same   fund,   but   by   highlighting   the   term   risk,   the
emphasis   is   on   the   risk,   and   rightly   so.
Anyway,   the   name   ‘Credit   risk   fund’,   should   give   you   a   heads   up   on   what   to
Yes,   you   guessed   it   right,   the   fund   is   loaded   with   Credit   Risk!
SEBI   here   simply   specifies   that   an   AMC   running   a   credit   risk   fund   should
● These   bonds   carry   maximum   credit   risk,   hence   the   probability   of   both,
The   Credit   risk   fund   is   where   the   fund   managers   cut   themselves   to   chase
Similarly,   a   fund   manager   running   a   credit   risk   fund   loads   up   the   portfolio
with   risky   papers   to   chase   yields.   Let   me   explain   this.
The   objective   of   a   credit   risk   fund   is   to   take   on   as   much   credit   risk   as   possible
Let   us   look   at   a   portfolio   of   a   Credit   Risk   Fund;   this   belongs   to   DSP’s   Credit
expected   from   a   credit   risk   fund.   Still,   the   combination   of   concentrated
The   credit   risk   fund   is   a   complicated   category   to   understand,   but   the   good
the   portfolio.   So   do   avoid   investing   your   money   in   a   credit   risk   fund.
The   presence   of   Gold   does   not   eliminate   the   credit   or   interest   rate   risk,   at   the
virtually   zero   Credit   risk,   because,   well,   the   Government   cannot   default   on
By   defining   the   duration,   the   entire   risk   profile   of   this   fund   changes.
Agreed,   there   is   no   Credit   risk   for   the   investor   here.   We   expect   the
Government   never   to   default.   But   think   about   the   interest   rate   risk   in   these
rate   risk   is   quite   significant   in   these   funds,    probably   large   enough   to
compensates   for   the   absence   of   credit   risk.
duration   and   modified   duration   to   get   a   sense   of   how   risky   these   funds   are.
● A   debt   fund   investor   should   watch   out   for   liquidity   risk
● The   cash   borrowings   of   a   fund   is   an   indicator   of   liquidity   risk
● The   banking   and   PSU   debt   carries   less   credit   risk   (relatively)
● Credit   risk   fund   carries   a   high   degree   of   credit   risk.   A   retail
● GILTS   don’t   have   credit   risk   but   have   a   significant   amount   of
hence   the   credit   risk   in   these   PSU   bonds   is   very   low.   The   tax-free   bit
your   interest   earnings   from   this   bond.   However,   if   you   manage   to   sell
So   the   moment   you   see   secured   senior   debt,   be   assured   that   the   credit   risk
bat   an   eyelid;   you   pay   3   Crore   cash   down   and   buy   the   property.
You   decide   to   sell   the   property   and   cash   out.   Assume   the   property   market
stayed   flat;   hence,   you   get   to   sell   the   property   at   cost,   i.e.   3   Crore.
Net   Yield   =   Net   P&L   /   Buy   price
Everything   remains   the   same,   except   that   at   the   time   of   buying,   instead   of   3
Net   Yield   =   Net   P&L   /   Buy   price
Notice,   everything   remained   the   same,   except   for   the   buy   price.   However,   this
Everything   remains   the   same,   except   that   at   the   time   of   buying,   instead   of   3
Net   Yield   =   Net   P&L   /   Buy   price
● The   rental   yield   and   the   net   yield   matches   only   when   the   buy   and   sell
● The   net   yield   is   lesser   than   the   rental   yield   when   the   buy   price   is   higher
● The   net   yield   is   higher   than   the   rental   yield   when   the   buy   price   is   lower
Buy   price   of   the   property   =   Buy   price   of   the   bond
Sell   price   of   the   property   =   Sell   price   of   the   bond
Well,   that   is   because   you   buy   this   bond   at   Rs.1115.03/-   and   upon   maturity,
Well,   this   is   because   when   you   buy   the   bond,   you   need   to   compensate   the
bond   seller   the   interest   he   has   earned   for   the   duration   he   has   held   the   bond.
interest   that   you   paid   to   the   seller).
If   you’ve   read   Varsity   by   now,   you’d   probably   know   me   as   a   one   hundred
term   portfolio.   I   always   knew   that   I   have   to   fix   this   and   start   to   diversify   my
diversification.   Maybe   it   is   a   good   idea   for   you   as   well   if   you   have   not   thought
● The   bond   buyer   pays   accrued   interest   to   the   bond   seller
even   have   enough   money   to   buy   all   the   shares   in   the   index.   What   they   ended
the   most   controversial   debates   in   finance,   I’ll   get   to   that   later.   But   even   when
increasing   the   chances   of   investors   buying   high   and   selling   low.
in   your   portfolio   and   have   allocation   based   on   your   risk   tolerance.   But   always
‘Arbitrage’   means.   Of   course,   if   you   are   a   regular   Varsity   reader,   then   this   is
in   Singapore   to   buy   me   Rock   n   Roll   audio   cassettes   from   Rs.100/-   per   tape
and   sell   the   same   here   in   Bangalore   for   Rs.150/-.   People   here   would   happily
buy   the   tape   at   Rs.150/-   because   there   was   no   other   source   for   them   to   buy
In   an   arbitrage   transaction,   you   buy   an   asset   (like   the   audiotape)   from   one
market   (Singapore)   where   the   asset   is   selling   cheap   (Rs.100/-)   and   sell   the
(150).   The   arbitrageur   (i.e.   me   in   this   example),   makes   a   risk   free   profit
all   I   had   to   do   in   life   was   buy   tapes   from   Singapore   and   sell   the   same   in
The   assumption   here   is   that   there   are   continuous   supply   and   demand   in   both
markets.   I   mean   imagine   a   situation   where   I   buy   tapes   worth   Rs.100,000/-
with   a   hope   to   sell   it   for   Rs.150,000/-   and   suddenly   I   realise   that   people   in
So   the   point   is,   unlike   the   popular   notion,   arbitrage   is   not   risk-free.   What   we
discussed   is   an   example   of   the   supply-demand   risk   associated   with   the
he   does   the   same,   i.e.   buy   tapes   from   Singapore   at   Rs.100/-   but   sells   the   same
The   above   is   an   arbitrage   opportunity.   All   you   have   to   do   is   buy   Kirloskar
Industries   at   546.4   in   BSE   and   sell   the   same   stock   in   NSE   at   562.4.   A er   all,   it’s
in   arbitrage   is   to   buy   the   asset   in   the   cheaper   market   and   sell   the   same   asset
Buy   Maruti   @   5714.4   in   the   cash   market
Sell   Maruti   Futures   (Exping   in   June)@   5735.6
execution   risk,   etc.   But   there   is   no   point   getting   into   these   details.   All   you
risky   with   a   predictable   outcome;   hence   it   is   naturally   low   volatile.
The   presence   of   debt   papers   is   what   makes   the   arbitrage   funds   risky.   How
risky   may   you   ask?   Well,   look   at   this   –
● As   many   investors   believe,   Arbitrage   funds   are   not   risk-free.   Thanks   to
the   debt   component,   there   is   an   element   of   risk.
Given   the   tax   treatment,   in   my   opinion,   if   you   are   prepared   to   take   some   risk,
fund.   The   risk   and   return   profile   are   similar   for   these   funds.
systematic   investment   plan   or   the   SIP.   I   guess   the   AMCs   and   the   regulators
Systematic   Investment   Plan   (SIP)   –   SIP   investments   requires   you   to   invest   a
reach   your   destination.   High   speed   also   comes   with   high   risk.   Likewise,
risk   too   is   high   in   such   investments   as   there   could   be   fears   of   a   crash   in   the
slight   modifications.   One   can   say   that   XIRR   is   a   modified   version   of   CAGR
XIRR   is   a   modified   version   of   CAGR.   Both   XIRR   and   CAGR   serve   the   same
to   buy   ice   creams;   I’d   run   to   the   factory   retail   shop   and   pick   up   a   couple   of   ice
Well,   because   the   owner   of   Anu   stores   needed   an   incentive   to   sell   Joy   ice
cream.   Without   the   incentive,   why   would   anyone   sell   a   product,   right?   That’s
the   shop   owners   incentive   and   sell   the   choco   bar   at   Rs.18/-.
cream   as   a   company   would   make   whatever   it   had   to   make   by   selling   the   ice
You   can   choose   to   buy   Mutual   Funds   in   two   ways   –
When   you   buy   a   mutual   fund   directly   from   the   AMC,   it   is   called   a   ‘Direct’
transaction.   The   direct   transaction   is   comparable   to   me   buying   the   ice   creme
However,   if   you   buy   a   mutual   fund   from   a   distributor,   then   it   is   comparable   to
buying   the   ice   cream   from   Anu   stores.
Now   the   seller   of   a   regular   mutual   fund   needs   an   incentive   to   sell   the   mutual
While   everything   remains   the   same,   only   the   TER   changes.   Have   a   look   at   the
selling   the   Mutual   Fund.
When   you   buy   from   the   AMC   directly,   there   is   no   distributor,   hence   no
manager,   same   risk,   etc.,   but   the    TER   or   the   expense   ratio   is   diﬀerent.
mutual   fund   distributor   to   sell   the   AMCs   fund.   You   may   have   a   couple   of
● Who   are   these   ‘MF   agents   or   distributors’   trying   to   convince   you   to   buy
always   turns   up   on   Sunday   mornings   to   try   to   sell   some   ‘financial   scheme’.
The   distributor   could   be   an   online   website   as   well,   where   you   buy   the   mutual
buy   a   regular   MF,   you   are   paying   a   higher   TER   fee.
Does   that   mean   buying   a   regular   plan   and   paying   a   higher   TER   is   bad?
Under   such   a   circumstance,   it   makes   sense   to   buy   a   regular   MF   from   the
The   diﬀerence   is   almost   Rs.22/-   per   unit.   It   is   only   natural   to   want   to   buy   the
for   dividends   as   well.   Remember,   when   you   buy   a   stock   of   a   company,   there
challenging   task.   A er   all,   Ni y   500   is   diversified,   has   more   stocks,   lesser
Now,   let’s   not   change   anything   in   the   high   five   indexes,   let   the   stocks   remain
value   of   the   index   remains   the   same.
It’s   remarkable   how   similar   these   return/drawdown   profiles   are.   There   was
We   will   continue   the   same   in   this   chapter   and   focus   on   key   risk   measures   of   a
mutual   fund.   Risk   measures   include   various   attributes   such   as   –
of   a   mutual   fund   is   the   measure   of   relative   risk,   expressed   as   number;   Beta
relative   risk   of   the   mutual   fund   vis   a   vis   its   benchmark.
https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/hedging-futures/
beta   gives   us   a   measure   of   the   relative   risk   of   the   fund.   In   general,
risky   compared   to   its   benchmark.   For   example,   the   Tata   Multicap   fund   has   a
beta   of   0.95,   hence   the   fund   is   slightly   less   risky   compared   to   its   benchmark.   I
If   the   beta   was   0.6   or   0.65,   the   fund   is   less   risk   or   less   volatile   compared   to   its
This   is   what   I   mean   by   ‘relative   risk’;   it   gives   us   a   perspective   of   how   risky   the
risky   as   its   benchmark.   For   example,   if   the   benchmark   falls   by   1%,   the   fund   is
have   similar   risk   profiles.
Lastly,   if   the   beta   of   the   fund   is   higher   than   1,   it   implies   that   the   fund   is   risker
is   20%   riskier   compared   to   its   benchmark.   If   the   benchmark   falls   by   1%,   the
recognize   the   fact   that   the   beta   is   a   measure   of   relative   risk,   it   tells   us   how
risky   the   stock   or   MF   is   compared   to   its   benchmark.   Beta   is   not   an   indicator   of
the   inherent   risk   of   the   stock   or   MF.
Likewise,   while   beta   gives   us   a   perspective   of   the   relative   riskiness   of   an
asset,   it   does   not   give   us   the   absolute   or   the   inherent   risk   of   the   asset   itself.
understand   the   concept   of   ‘Risk-free’   return.   The   risk-free   return   is   the
maximum   return   you   can   generate   without   taking   any   risk.   By   risk   I   mean   –
market   risk,   credit   risk,   interest   rate   risk,   and   unsystematic   risk.
degree   of   risk.   Understandable,   but   let’s   keep   that   argument   aside   for   this
return,    on   a   risk-adjusted   basis.
Risk-adjusted   basis   means   we   need   to   –
risk-free   return,   multiply   this   by   the   beta
Alpha   =   (MF   Return   –   risk   free   return)   –   (Benchmark   return   –   risk   free
the   fund   is   0.75.   What   do   you   think   of   the   alpha   assuming   the   risk-free   rate   is
(remember   beta   is   just   0.75).   Hence   we   are   rewarding   the   fund   for   its   good
See   that?   While   the   returns   remain   the   same,   thanks   to   beta,   the   alpha   is
significantly   lesser   on   a   risk-adjusted   basis.
returns.   Alpha   is   risk-adjusted.   The   fund   is   rewarded   if   the   returns   are
generated   by   keeping   a   low-risk   profile   and   penalized   for   being   volatile.
us   how   risky   the   fund   is   when   compared   to   its   benchmark.   Beta   is   a   relative
risk   and   does   not   reveal   the   fund’s   inherent   risk.
The   inherent   risk   of   a   fund   is   revealed   by   the   ‘Standard   Deviation’   of   the   fund.
https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/understanding-volatility-part-1/
riskiness   of   the   stock   or   the   mutual   fund
Higher   the   volatility,   higher   is   the   risk.
which   implies   that   the   small-cap   fund   is   way   riskier   compared   to   the   long
● Diversify   smartly   (and   not   over   diversify)
benchmark   they   are   relatively   less   risky.   But   how   risky   are   they
because   of   the   low   beta   factor   plus   the   low   risk-free   return   prevailing   in
I   hope   the   risk   parameters   are   starting   to   make   sense   to   you.   We   will   now   shi 
Rf   is   the   risk-free   return.   Along   with   the   fund’s   return,   I’ve   also   stated   the
standard   deviation/volatility/risk   of   the   two   funds.   Now,   which   of   the   two
given   that   we   have   to   evaluate   them   on   two   parameters,   i.e.   both   the   risk   and
Ignoring   the   risk,   purely   on   a   return   basis,   Fund   B   is   better.   Ignoring   the
return,   purely   on   a   risk   basis,   Fund   A   is   better.   But   in   reality,   you   cannot
isolate   risk   and   reward;   you   need   to   factor   in   both   these   and   figure   out   which
The   Sharpe   Ratio   helps   us   here.   It   bundles   the   concept   of   risk,   reward,   and
the   risk-free   rate   and   gives   us   a   perspective.
Sharpe   ratio   =   [Fund   Return   –   Risk-Free   Return]/Standard   Deviation   of
above   the   risk-free   return)   for   every   unit   of   risk   undertaken.   Naturally,   by   this
returns   for   every   unit   of   risk   undertaken.
So   it   turns   out   that   both   the   funds   are   similar   in   terms   of   their   risk   and   reward
for   every   unit   of   risk   undertaken.
Do   note,   Sharpe   ratio   considers   only   price   based   risk.   It   does   not   consider
credit   or   interest   rate   risk.   Hence,   there   is   no   point   looking   at   the   Sharpe   ratio
conclude   our   discussion   on   Mutual   Fund   risk   parameters   and   then   shi    focus
● Beta   measures   the   relative   risk   of   the   fund   compared   to   its
● Higher   the   beta,   higher   is   the   relative   risk
● Beta   is   not   an   indicator   of   the   inherent   risk   of   the   fund
return   on   a   risk-adjusted   basis
● The   standard   Deviation   measures   the   riskiness   of   the   fund.
performance/risk   measures,   i.e.   the   Sortino   Ratio   and   the   Capture   Ratios.
Sharpe   ratio   =   [Fund   Return   –   Risk-Free   Return]/Standard   deviation   of   the
Deviation’,   which,   as   you   know,   is   an   assessment   of   risk.
Well,   we   are   talking   about   the   risk   of   the   returns   varying   from   the   average
expected   returns.   Read   that   line   again;   we   are   defining   risk   as   to   the   variation
calculate   the   standard   deviation   or   the   risk.
Sharpe   ratio   =   [Fund   Return   –   Risk-Free   Return]/Standard   deviation   of   the
returns   per   unit   of   risk.   However,   the   risk   contains   both   positive   and   negative
denominator   has   only   the   negative   returns   or   the   ‘downside   risk’,   is
=   [Fund   Return   –   Risk-Free   Return]/Downside   Risk
only   the   downside   risk.   Like   the   Sharpe   ratio,   higher   the   Sortino’s   ratio,   better
with   the   group,   he   knew   when   to   cut   the   slack.   He   knew   it   was   too   risky   to   not
negative   return),   but   this   friend   had   good   risk   management   practise,   he
If   we   were   to   summarize   his   performance,   he   had   max   fun,   but   managed   risk
you   want   the   fund   to   have   a   great   risk   management   practice?
I   prefer   to   look   at   the   latter.   I   like   funds   which   manage   the   risk   better,   and   I
in   risk   management   here,   and   I’d   value   this   far   higher   than   the   upside   capture
● Sharpe   ratio   measures   the   return   per   unit   of   risk   by
○ Most   recently,   we   discussed   the   various   performance   and   risk
about,   i.e.   the   fund’s   ability   to   manage   risk   and   generate   returns.
against   a   diversified   index,   which   means   Ni y   50   TRI   may   not   be
○ The   fund   manager   has   remained   the   same,   which   is   fine.   If   you
deviation   of   the   category   is   21.38%.   If   you   look   at   it   from   a   risk   perspective,
this   is   a   good   sign   as   it   hints   that   the   fund   is   good   at   managing   the   risk.
which   means   either   the   risk-free   return   is   higher   compared   to   the   portfolio’s
fund   taking   in   more   risk   compared   to   its   benchmark?
get   a   perspective   on   the   dispersion   of   returns.
The   dispersion   in   returns   when   looked   at   the   minimum   and   maximum
quite   remarkable   in   my   opinion.   While   the   fund’s   minimum   is   8.59%,   the
As   far   as   the   2nd   concern   goes,   let   us   focus   on   the   risk   metrics   of   the   fund,
24.4   –   Risk   –   Return   matrix   check
I   find   the   risk-reward   matrix   published   by   Morningstar   quite   useful.   Have   a
The   initial   bit   highlights   the   fund’s   risk   versus   the   category   and   the   fund’s
looking   at   it   again.   Risk   versus   the   category   risk   is   ‘below   average’,   so   that’s
The   Y-axis   of   this   matrix   is   returned,   and   the   X-axis   is   the   risk.   If   you   have   read
Varsity’s   Module   9   on   ‘Risk   Management’,   then   this   matrix   is   already   familiar
benchmark   has   generated   a   return   of   10%   by   taking   the   risk   of   19%.
conclude   that   the   average   category   risk   is   similar   to   that   of   the   benchmark’s
Unfortunately,   for   19%   risk,   the   category’s   return   does   not   match   upto   its
risk,   the   benchmark   oﬀers   better   returns.
Well,   the   fund   has   a   better   risk-reward   ratio   compared   to   the   benchmark.   It
lesser   risk,   which   in   my   opinion   is   good.
returns   like   the   benchmark   by   taking   on   lesser   risk   (at   a   lower   cost   hopefully).
benchmark   have   a   similar   risk-return   profile   (18%   risk,   12%   return),   the   fund
has   slightly   lesser   risk   and   higher   return   profile.
terms   of   risk   and   reward   profile.   As   the   last   step,   let   us   look   at   the   capture
the   fund’s   downside,   which   is   good.   Again,   this   a   reflection   of   better   risk
returns   to   get   a   sense   of   the   dispersion   of   the   return
● Look   for   the   risk-reward   matrix   and   understand   the
risk-reward   profile   on   5   and   10   years   basis
indeed   good,   especially   when   it   comes   to   risk   management.
across   both   risks   and   return   parameters.   The   fund   ticks   oﬀ   well   on   all   the
and   the   fund’s   risk-reward   profile   matches.   In   case,   you   do   not   follow   this
major   risks   associated   with   a   debt   fund.
Credit   risk   –    Remember   the   debt   MF   invests   its   money   in   debt   obligations.
All   AMCs   running   debt   funds   carry   this   risk,   i.e.   the   risk   of   default;   this   is   called
the   ‘credit   risk’.   Many   funds   in   the   past   have   taken   a   hit   due   to   such   defaults.
Now,   there   is   a   variation   to   credit   risk.   Imagine   that   as   on   today,   everything   is
say   AAA   to   AA.   The   act   of   lowering   the   credit   rating   itself   is   a   risk;   this   is   called,
Interest   rate   risk   –    Bonds   prices   are   sensitive   to   interest   rate   changes,   both
The   sensitivity   of   the   bond   prices   to   the   interest   rate   risk   is   captured   by
risk   associated   with   the   changes   in   interest   rate.   When   a   debt   mutual   fund
Alright,   now   that   we   had   a   quick   refresher   on   the   risks   involved,   let   us   focus
low   risk.   O en   debt   funds   get   sold   as   a   safe   haven   for   your   capital,   an
reiterating   this   to   highlight   the   fact   that   debt   funds   are   not   risk-free.   Debt
debt   fund   is   centred   around   the   risk   and   the   fund’s   portfolio,   so   this   will   be
that   the   fund   is   susceptible   to   default   risk,   credit   rating   risk,   interest   rate   risk,
and   the   ‘change   in   the   perception’   of   interest   rate,   risk.
Now,   in   case   any   of   these   risks   get   triggered,   then   the   fall   in   NAV   will   be   steep,
is   highly   susceptible   to   credit   risk.   Now,   how   do   we   figure   out   that   the   debt
fund   manager   is   managing   the   credit   risk?   Well,   we   need   to   check   for   –
○ The   diversification   of   the   fund
credit   risk   on   single   large   exposure.
14.41%   are   sovereign   papers,   these   papers   don’t   have   credit   risk,   so   that’s
comes   with   credit   risk.   The   exposure   to   Sovereign   bonds   is   less   (14.5%)
higher   credit   risk,   which   to   me   is   not   a   great   sign   considering   this   is   a   short
So   what   is   the   need   to   take   on   credit   risk?   I’d   still   be   ok   with   the   credit   risk   as
long   as   there   is   enough   diversification,   but   the   concentrated   portfolio   is   not
credit   risk   by   placing   concentrated   bets   while   at   the   same   time   not   so   ok   with
can   also   double   up   as   an   indicator   of   risk   when   compared   to   the   category’s
that   the   fund   is   taking   on   additional   risk   to   chase   yield.
I   want   to   look   at   the   fund’s   market   risk   parameters   such   as   the   standard
○ Credit   risk   is   higher   compared   to   the   category
return,   that   means   the   fund   manager   is   taking   on   risk   to   chase
○ Apart   from   the   standard   debt   fund   risks,   keep   an   eye   on   the
liquidity   risk.   We   have   discussed   the   liquidity   risk   here   –
https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-debt-funds-part-4/ .   If
red   flag   and   an   indicator   of   liquidity   risk
○ Always   diversify   across   AMCs,   for   example,   if   you   want   to   invest
○ It   is   best   if   you   avoid   investing   in   a   credit   risk   fund.   Credit   risk
funds   take   on   credit   risk   to   generate   a   return.   In   my   opinion,   you
○ Debt   mutual   funds   carry   credit   risk,   interest   risk,   and
change   in   credit   rating   risk
○ Sovereign   bonds   do   not   carry   credit   risk   but   do   carry
○ One   can   look   at   YTM   as   the   measure   of   risk
○ We   are   covered   for   the   risk
Cover   for   the   risk   –    An   individual   faces   many   diﬀerent   kinds   of   risk   in   his/her
lifetime.   Risk   across   multiples   areas   of   life   –   physical   health,   mental   health,
journey   is   to   ensure   you   get   cover   for   these   two   types   of   risks.
I   want   to   stress   that   don’t   buy   insurance   products   linked   to   investment   plans.
the   late   ’20s,   and   both   are   working   professionals.    The   couple   aspires   to   buy   a
○ ‘Special   remark’   –   Things   you   need   to   be   aware   of.
Hence,   as   an   in   investor,   if   you   buy   multiple   funds   of   the   same   type   across
diversification,   where   you   split   your   money   across   two   diﬀerent   AMCs.   You
diversify   across   AMCs   and   market   capitalizations.
Case   1    –   A   newly   married   couple,   aspires   to   buy   an   apartment,   estimated   at
4. Age   –   Young   can   aﬀord   to   take   financial   risks   in   life.
○ Small-cap   funds   –   These   are   risky,   volatile.   Of   course,   ten   years   is
○ Thematic   funds   are   sector   dependent;   if   the   call   on   sector   goes
The   easiest   way   to   invest   the   funds   would   be   a   systematic   investment   plan
The   idea   here   is   to   protect   the   corpus   from   a   sequence   risk,   where   in   the
take   on   a   slightly   higher   degree   of   risk
○ Credit   risk   is   risky   so   that   they   can   be   avoided.
○ You   may   want   to   rebalance   based   on   your   risk   appetite,   wherein
gentleman   (and   a   good   friend   of   mine)   from   the   industry   who   is   super
A   factor   is   a   broad,   persistent   driver   of   the   returns   of   a   stock.   Put   another   way,
just   market   risk;   this   was   what   came   to   be   known   as   the   Fama   French   3-factor
Apart   from   the   famous   Fama   French   factors,   other   factors   like   Momentum
Refers   to   the   observation   that   low-risk   securities   tend   to   earn
higher   risk-adjusted   returns   than   high-risk   securities.
momentum,   quality,   and   low   volatility   have   performed   vs   the   Ni y   50   and
impressive   with   shallow   drawdowns.   Ni y   Alpha,   a   proxy   for   momentum   has
Risk-based :   Factor   premiums   exist   because   investors   need   to   be
compensated   for   the   additional   risk   they   bear.   For   example,   academic
believes   that   the   momentum   eﬀect   exists   because   of   investor   under-reaction
free   lunches   except   for   diversification   probably.
dispersion   in   returns   among   the   same   or   similar   funds.
replacements   for   index   funds   or    good    diversified   active   funds   that    perform
your   equity   allocation   should   be   good   consistent   diversified   active   equity
One   solution   is   to   diversify   among   factors,   there   are   multi-factors   funds   that
momentum   and   low   volatility.   Similarly,   DSP   Quant   Fund   and   the   likes   of   Tata
underperform   simple   diversified   funds   or   index   funds   for
● If   you   want   to   invest   in   factor   funds,   diversification   among
he   can   contribute   more   to   Varsity,   and   enrich   Varsity’s   content   🙂
copyrights,   trademarks,   and   so   and   so   forth.
you   preserve   the   purchasing   power   of   your   wealth?   You   buy    assets ,   of   course.
$40,000,   a   newbie   can   buy   just   $10   worth   of   it.
and   persist   forever.   The   longer   the   price   moves,   the   stronger   the   narratives.
having   to   predict   is   to   buy   a   little   bit   of   all   assets.
averages   and   risk   capacity.
Me :   Let   me   tell   you   something   about   sequence   risk.   Sequence   risk   means   that
A   simple   way   to   avoid   this   risk   is   to   invest   in   a   basket   of   assets   whose   returns
28.4   –   Diversification   vs   Diworsification
eggs   and   emu   eggs   is   theoretically   diversified   but   practically   useless   when
To   create   a   diversified   portfolio,   you   need   first   to   understand   the   drivers
Vectors   of   diversification
between   them.   A   well-diversified   portfolio   covers   these   diﬀerent   vectors   with
are   both   a   function   of   global   demand   and   USDINR   exchange   rate.
cushion   it   during   sell-oﬀs,   owning   Indian   bonds   may   not   oﬀer   the   same
28.5   -Risks   to   diversification
As   more   assets   get   financialized,   building   a   diversified   portfolio   becomes
the   same   platform   and   allow   investors   to   lever   one   asset   to   buy   another,   you
to   diversify,   it   blunts   its   eﬀectiveness.
● One   cannot   avoid   buying   assets.
stock   exchanges.   You   can   buy   and   sell   an   ETF   anytime,   just   like   a   stock.
1. India   is   still   a   tiny   market.   We   just   have   about   1.7   crore   active   demat
accounts,   and   unlike   a   mutual   fund,   you   can   only   buy   an   ETF   if   you
AMCs   can   pay   distributors   &   platforms   commissions   to   sell   their   mutual
can   buy   and   sell   an   ETF   anytime   you   want   just   like   a   stock.
When   you   buy   a   mutual   fund,   the   AMC   takes   money   from   you   and   buys   the
redeem   your   mutual   funds,   the   AMC   sells   the   securities   and   returns   your
money.   This   is   quite   straightforward.   However,   when   you   buy   an   ETF,   you
don’t   really   interact   with   the   AMC   most   of   the   time   because   most   buying   and
selling   happens   on   the   stock   exchanges.   It’s   just   an   exchange   of   units
between   buyers   and   sellers.
I   said   when   you   buy   an   ETF,   you   “mostly”   don’t   interact   with   the   AMC   and   I’ll
When   you   buy   a   mutual   fund,   you   look   at   the   NAV.   Similarly,   when   you   are
buying   an   ETF,   you   look   at   the   ETF   market   price   on   Kite.
These   prices   are   determined   by   the   demand,   supply   and   the   trading   activity
Like   buying   ETF   units   on   the   stock   exchange,   you   can   also   buy   units   directly
exchanges,   you   cannot   buy   1   or   2   units   directly   from   the   AMC.   You   can   only
writing,   it’s   about   Rs   80   lakhs.   Meaning,   you   need   80   lakhs   to   buy   all   the
two-way   quotes   on   the   exchange,   meaning   they   buy   at   the    bid    and   sell   at   the
demand   and   supply—the   prices   of   liquid   ETFs   trade   in   line   with   the   NAV   of   the
important.   For   one,   you   need   not   always   buy   an   ETF   on   the   stock   exchange.   If
you   are   buying   in   multiples   of   the   creation   unit   size,   buying   it   directly   from
costs   when   you   buy   large   quantities   on   the   exchange.
them   to   your   demat.   The   AMC   will   create   units   at   the   iNAV.    Similarly,   you   can
authorized   participant   (AP)   will   buy   all   the   underlying   securities   that   make   up
the   ETF   creation   unit.   In   this   case,   the   AP   will   buy   all   the   50   Ni y   stocks   of   the
sell   them   on   the   exchange.
Similarly,   if   there’s   a   discount,   the   AP   will   buy   the   ETF   units   on   the   exchange
of   the   ETF   to   the   AP,   who   will,   in   turn,   sell   them   in   the   market.   The   diﬀerence
AMC   and   asking   them   to   create   units,   which   happens   at   the   NAV   and   sell   them
This   premium   persisted   for   a   long   time.   Then   Motilal,   If   I’m   not   wrong,
This   is   the   most   important   thing   when   buying   or   selling   an   ETF   because   they
of   an   ETF   and   the   trading   volumes   to   decide   if   an   ETF   is   liquid.   Although   these
2   things   should   be   considered,   the   size   of   an   ETF   or   the   daily   trading   volumes
a   really   terrible   mistake   when   buying   an   ETF,   you   will   get   a   good   fill   at   Rs
than   the   last   traded   price,   given   that   there   are   no   volumes   and   your   order
So,   AUM   and   trading   volumes   don’t   tell   you   everything.   Market   markers
limit   order   to   buy,   your   order   will   be   executed   as   the   market   makers   place   an
order   to   sell.   But   yeah,   not   all   ETFs   have   active   market   makers,   this   has   to   be
create   new   ETF   units.   Large   institutions,   HNIs,   typically   don’t   buy   ETFs   on   the
outstanding   shares,   less   trading   volumes,   and   usually   keep   hitting   upper   and
demand,   the   market   maker   would   have   had   to   create   units   to   satisfy   the
demand.   Now   if   some   of   the   underlying   stocks   are   not   liquid   or   have   hit
NAV   because   there   will   be   more   demand   for   the   existing   units.   Not   just,
To   summarize,   trading   volumes   and   AUM   are   factors,   but   they   don’t   tell   you
factors   such   as   value,   quality,   low-volatility,   momentum   etc.
consider   before   you   buy   an   ETF.
I   cannot   stress   this   enough   but   never   use   market   orders   when   buying   an   ETF,
You   should   always   buy   an   ETF   that   tracks   the   underlying   index   as   closely   as
error   on   the   NAV,   but   you   buy   and   sell   based   on   the   price,   which   can   be   totally
Look   at   the   average   volumes
Look   at   the   average   volumes   over   a   period   of   time   and   see   how   an   ETF   has
ETFs   that   just   have   a   brief   spike   in   volumes   and   then   don’t   trade.   The
volumes   are   about   150   units.   You   can   check   the   average   volumes   by   applying
a   moving   average   on   the   volume   chart   on   Kite.   So   assuming   you   had   bought
Avoid   buying   and   selling   at   market   open
also   tend   to   trade   at   abnormal   prices   because   of   the   low   volumes,   even
about   them.   Most   of   the   ETF   volumes   are   in   ETFs   oﬀered   by   Nippon,   ICICI,
tracking   errors   and   almost   no   volumes.
value,   it’s   better   if   you   approach   the   AMC   to   create   units   rather   then   buying
you   can’t   buy   and   sell   index   funds   immediately.
With   ETFs   since   you   can   buy   &   sell
is   very   little   persistence   in   performance.   The   best   performing   fund   o en   ends
small-caps,   these   are   severely   risky   and   buy   and   hold   may   not   be   an   optimal
still   small   and   this   needs   to   be   kept   in   mind   when   buying   and
ETF   with   the   intraday   or   indicative   NAV   (iNAV)   before   buying
reform,   with   an   extremely   supportive   demographic   profile   and   a
pans.   His   wife   managed   a   small   homemade   papad   and   pickle   business,   and
We   have   discussed   the   concept   of   market   cap   earlier   in   Varsity.   For   those   of
Apart   from   dividend   income,   the   Government   also   has   revenue   by   selling
As   a   long-term   investor,   you   need   to   keep   track   of   trends   in   these   spend
